PALM CIVETS RESCUED 

People for Animals saved a family of palm civets from ignorant residents. Late in the night on 2nd June, 2 adult and 3 baby civets strayed into a residential area and took refuge in a house in Lakkhibagh Mohalla. The residents were hostile towards these shy creatures and soon the entire locality gathered, armed with stones, batons and cameras. They blocked any passage for escape for one adult civet, while the others had escaped into the wilderness. People for Animals Volunteers reached just in time and prevented the residents from attacking the animal which was visibly under great stress. The residents were told that their fears were unfounded and we convinced them to clear the passage for the animal to escape. After much resistance, the crowd of over 70 people agreed to let the animal go. It is noteworthy that no forest official, DFO, Ranger, Guard, could be contacted even through the 108 service. The forest department has been informed now to have a team on standby even at night for animal and forest fire related emergencies. Share this:

6 GOATS RESCUED FROM PASHUBALI

Date:8.10.11 People for Animals Uttarakhand rescued 6 goats and lambs from slaughter at the Daat Kali Mandir at Aasha Rodi. Dr Rakesh Kumar IAS spotted the presence of these animals close to the temple in the morning and suspected that the High Court Order may be challenged by the acts that were being carried out there. Upon his information, People for Animals Uttarakhand acted immediately and seized 6 goats from the temple. 
The temple priest who cooperated with the proceedings was instructed to erect a board near the entrance saying that bringing animals to the temple for slaughter is strictly disallowed. The saved goats have now been adopted by Dr Yogi Aeron who owns a unique farmhouse near Kuthalgate on Mussoorie Road. They will live there for their entire natural lives. Dr Aeron is an avid naturalist and a social worker and has always encouraged and supported the endeavours of People for Animals. In the past one year PFA Uttarakhand has been able to completely eradicate the menace of animal sacrifice from at least 22 temples in Uttarakhand and many others have voluntarily given up the practice. Daat Kali Mandir Trust has been let off with a warning as they willingly cooperated and have committed themselves to ensure that no more animals will be brought to the temple anymore. If any person visits the temple with a sacrificial animal, the priests will take police help to prevent his entry into their premises. Google +1 Facebook Twitter Email Print StumbleUpon

ILLEGAL CATTLE MARKET SHUTDOWN

People for Animals Uttarakhand today raided the Sahaspur Cattle market yet again upon repeated complaints received by locals. As per the Uttarakhand Protection of Cow and it’s Progeny Act 2007, Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1960 by it’s Transport of Cattle on Foot Rules, and the latest Government Order issued from the Govt of Uttarakhand to stringently follow the provisions laid therein, the cattle could not be sold to persons from outside the State without a No-Objection Certificate issued by the District Majistrate and upon payment of Rs 500/-. Cattle was freely being sold to residents of Uttar Pradesh without maintaining any record of their identity. Contractor Praveen Agarwal was named in an FIR registered at the Sahaspur Thana last year by People for Animals Uttarakhand.As per the law, no person who was himself or any of his relatives was charged with any act against the provisions of the Uttarakhand Protection of Cow and it’s Progeny Act 2007, could be given the contract of the Cattle Market under any circumstances. Facilities for feeding and lairing the animals or even to provide medical certificates of fitness for Travel on foot or in a vehicle were found to be completely absent. The Gram Panchayat had given out the contract of the Market to Mr Agarwal for Rs 7 Lakhs and sixteen thousand but the latter today chose to surrrender his contract and cited poor facilities and time to time intervention of PFA as the difficulties which he could not overcome.The letter was submitted with the Garm Pradhan and the SDM Vikasnagar. Acknowledging the gross irregularities in the management of the Cattle Market, the Gram Pradhan assured that the contract for the Market will not be given out to any other party but could not resist trying to put up a fight with the PFA Members. It is noteworthey that last week on Sunday PFA members saved 39 old, frail, unproductive bulls from the clutches of cattle smugglers at Chota Rampur. The link for the consignment trails back to the Sahaspur Cattle Market. The bulls saved last week are in the care of the Animal Husbandry Department at Pashulok, Rishikesh.

ADOPTION COLUMN

All the units of People for Animals are starting an adoption column in their respective cities and towns through local and national newspapers. If you also have animals that need adoption or would like to adopt a pet contact your nearest PFA unit. DON’T BREED OR BUY WHILE HOMELESS DIE! Let us try and get as many animals off the street as possible and find them loving and caring homes.

TWO ARRESTED FOR KILLING PUP FOR MEAT, TURTLE RESCUED ALIVE.

Upon suspicion, PFA Uttarakhand raided the house of a Branch manager of a North Eastern Finance Company on 18.10.2011 and found the body of one freshly killed pup and another pup alive in addition to which a turtle was also found from a tub kept in the bathroom. PFA Uttarakhand, had been monitoring the activities of this family for some time after receiving complaints from those living and working in the area. Acting on information received from members of the public when entered the house, they discovered that one pup had been brutally beheaded with a blunt knife and family members were preparing to cook it while another pup was still alive. The pup that was alive was shivering with fear as the slaughter took place while this one was tied nearby. A case was booked under IPC section 429 and another will be booked under the wildlife protection act once the species of the Turtle is identified by the Wildlife Institute of India. The family members have confessed to often killing and eating dogs especially during festive occasions when they had friends visiting their home. The chief veterinary officer was informed about the case and the dog carcass was sent for post mortem examination while the two men arrested will be produced before the magistrate on Wednesday. Citizens from the North Eastern region of India have often been reported to kill dogs for meat. The ongoing PFA campaign to stop this barbaric and grossly illegal practice will send a strong message to the people that such brutality will not be tolerated by civilized citizenry. Associated media

BHOOKHAL 2011

Bhookhal Kalinka Temple, Thallisain, Pauri Garhwal, Uttarakhand The gods seem to have returned to the Bhookhal temple on 26th november 2011 when for the first time in 500 years, not a single animal was sacrificed there during the infamous Bhookhal mela in Pauri Garhwal in Uttarakhand. More than 5,000 animals were sacrificed at the temple hill every year during the mela. Smt. Maneka Gandhi visited Bhookhal in July 2010 and heralded the anti animal sacrifice campaign by PFA in Uttarakhand. On 7th December 2010 High Court of Uttarakhand ordered in PIL number 77 of 2010 that no animal is to be killed in public view and no carcass may be left on any land public or private. Last year, on 11th December, despite the High Court order, the District administration of Pauri Garhwal could not prevent the butchery of hundreds of animals. The PFA team watched helplessly as a mob of 30,000 drunken, bloodthirsty men and women, each carrying a weapon, hacked animals without any compunction. The police had orders not to use force as it was the Chief Minister’s constituency. The PAC watched from a distance. We video graphed the event, barely being able to see, as our tears would not stop. The persons hacking young, horrified animals, and dancing around them with joy were all filmed. Later we forced the administration to lodge FIRs against all such individuals who violated the court’s order. We compelled the Animal Husbandry Department to send a team down the trench where the animals were rolled off and conduct post mortem on all the carcasses so that their existence there comes on record. We flooded their offices with RTI applications. We even saw the FIRs through to the charge sheet stage and made sure that no pressure on the DM is greater than what we exerted. On 25th November this year, the Chief Justice of Uttarakhand gave special orders for Bhookhal in response to our plea. He ordered that if any animal is slaughtered at the temple, the onus of proving with photographs that the slaughter was done in compliance with the Court’s order, would lie with the Administration, to be produced before the court on 29th November. This was next to impossible for the DM to achieve as finding a place beyond public view on a temple hill teeming with 30,000 men and women at any given time, and then forcing them to carry each 600 kg carcass back home was a matter that could not be even considered. We were instructed by the court to film the event and report any contempt. On 26th November, we were at Bhookhal, armed with video cameras and we shadowed the SP, ASP and the DM and recorded all. The will of the people was weaker because of last years FIRs and the will of the administration was stronger because of this year’s orders. PAC and police had specific orders this time to prevent animals from being brought anywhere within 10 kilometers of the temple and arrest all the people who attempted to defy orders. We could scarcely believe that we actually saw no he buffalo in the entire region. A few who showed up with goats were sent packing and their goats confiscated. News poured in on wireless sets that buffalo bulls were confiscated from far off places and people were being arrested much much before they had a chance to become a nuisance at the temple. We suspected that there must be slaughter going on in the dense jungles on the hill slopes. We combed the entire place and searched with binoculars. Not a single animal could be seen anywhere. Some groups at the temple turned violent. They entered the temple and started pelting coconuts on the crowd at large. The police was ready with tear gas but were able to control them through plain clothes men, working within the groups. Even tranquilizer guns to be used on buffaloes in case one runs amok, were kept on standby with vets on duty. (The sacrificial animal is made to consume alcohol as per ‘tradition’). The Forest Department was also deputed on jungle check posts where trouble could be suspected and the education department and animal husbandry department employees were also put on duty. The DM, Mr M.C.Upreti had worked on war footing and we were dancing with joy. The Goddess returned to the Bhookhal temple and we hope she remains there forever. Persons you may wish to write/speak to for their splendid effort: 
DM Pauri Sri M.C.Upreti – 9411110033 
SP Pauri Sri Anant Shankar Tankwale – 9411112081 
ASP Pauri Sri Dhirendra Gunjiyal – 9411112773

AN AWARENESS AND EDUCATION PROGRAMME FOR THE DOON SCHOOL AT MALSI DEER PARK

PFA Uttarakhand conducted an awareness and education programme with 30 students of Doon School at Malsi Deer Park on the 11th of August 2013. A condensed version of the ‘Guidelines for Establishment & Scientific Management of Zoos in India’ was briefly explained to the students. The students were then divided into groups and each group was given the task of choosing certain points from the laws that they would like to investigate in the park. The groups showed understanding and enthusiasm in the investigation. Various points were noted by the students which were discussed at the end of the investigation. Malsi Deer Park had litter scattered about all over the place. The Doon School also helped in cleaning up the entrance of the park and the children’s section. 
				Children from The Doon School in front of the leopard enclosure at Malsi Deer Park.
				 
				Picking up rubbish.
				 
				At the end of the investigation all the teams presented a compilation of their findings. 
				 
				Gauri Maulekhi interacting with The Doon School students at the beginning of the education and awareness programme at Malsi Deer Park.
				 
				The Doon School students exploring the campus of Malsi Deer Park.
				 
				Gauri Maulekhi answering doubts at the end of the investigation.
				 
				At the end of the investigation all the teams presented a compilation of their findings.
				 
				The Doon School students showed a lot of enthusiasm during the invesigation and clean up at Malsi Deer Park.
				 
				Now that little bit of rubbish didn’t stand a chance.
				

HIMS – 28 SPECIMENS OF ENDANGERED SPECIEIS RECOVERED,TOXICOLOGY LAB SEALED

Press Release 
Dehradun 4.10.2011 People for Animals Uttarakhand received information that reptiles of extremely endangered varieties have been obtained by the Himalaya Institute of Medical Sciences by unscrupulous means and and were being kept by their Forensic and Toxicology Department for laboratory purposes. Upon conducting an undercover operation this morning, the information was found to be true and the Members of the Organisation found 28 specimens of Highly Endangered species such as Russel’s Viper, King Cobra, Spectacled Cobra, Cat Snake, Common Krait, Black scorpion etc. were found in the Toxicology lab/Museum of the Institute. The Vice Chancellor of the Institute Dr Vijay Dhasmana could not be officially questioned as he was out of station. The HOD of the Forensics and Toxicology Department could offer no valid source of the reptiles that he had in his possession. He admitted that no Forest Officer was ever informed about the carcasses in their charge or their procurement of it. He also confirmed, strangely that he could not identify the snakes at all, even a king cobra, inspite of being a Professor in Toxicology. 
The Forest Department has now sealed the lab and has initiated action against a head of department after 28 snakes, three scorpions and one bat were rescued from the lab. While one 14 feet long king cobra estimated to weigh around 8 kgs was found recently killed and stored in the lab, the other snakes rescued dead include cobras, one saw scaled and Russell’s viper, two common Kraits and non-venomous species including rat snakes and keel backs in addition to three scorpions and one bat. Upon confirmation of the presence of these snakes, the PFA members called upon the Dehradun Divisional Forest Officer Meenakshi Joshi for action. People For Animals Uttarakhand has already exposed major violations in the animal experimentation carried out at the institute lab in the past as well. According to PFA Uttarakhand spokesperson “having custody of any wild animal, even the carcass or a body part of any wild animal is a clear violation of Wildlife Protection Act section 9 and qualifies for ‘hunting’, for which the head of the department Sanjay Das should be arrested. However, the department is acting leniently in this case by not arresting Das as he was not even aware of the species of snakes under his charge which included at least three species of highly venomous snakes”. The bail hearing in the CJM Court a week later will be contested by PFA Uttarakhand. It is noteworthy that even in the past the PFA has  documented mistreatment of animals and blatant violations of rules in HIMS animal house facility  that resulted in a government order to the institute to suspend all animal experiments immediately.

MOHAAN CATTLE FAIR SMUGGLING STOPPED

 History Held at Mohaan since 1978, this fair allowed farmers from the plains to bring their young cattle and sell it to the hill people, and the people from kumaon, to bring the ‘ready to work bulls’ down, for sale to the tarai farmers. Zila panchayat, hosted the affair each year since 1999.  Complaint received The contractor Mohd Tavvar (Blacklisted Munnauar’s stooge) was conducting the Fair in a fashion that allowed any person to walk into the mela and purchase as many bulls for whatever purpose. As a result, butchers and dealers of hide from Rampur, Tanda and Moradabad were smuggling the cattle out of Uttarakhand through the porous state boundary, in trucks or on foot. Initial action taken A team of PFA Nainital went to Mohan and took pictures and videos of the mela and interviews with the buyers who were apparently butchers, and posted the same on the Internet. PFA sought help from RSS and mobilised teams of Sangh workers from Nainital, Ramnagar, Kashipur and Bazpur who could patrol the area to prevent any cattle from being smuggled out. 80 arrests were made, more than 150 animals recovered and thousands were prevented from being slaughtered, due to this effort.PFA, with the help of informers, coordinated the combing operations done by the Sangh workers in the forest areas of Ramnagar and Bazpur. This was done every night, consistently since 10.11.09, and went on for an indefinite period.PFA alerted the print and the electronic media. The Animal Husbandry Department moved swiftly under the urgency conveyed by Sri Jai Raj, Member of the Uttarakhand Animal Welfare Board and the Govt sent a team of officials to Mohan under Sri Jai Raj’s leadership so that appropriate action may be taken and a report be given to the department for follow up.  Government order On 11.11.09, Principal Secy, AH, A.K.Joshi, issued a Govt Order which demanded the local administration to tighten the scrutiny on the Fair and take necessary steps to ensure that the Uttarakhand Protection of Cow Progeny Act 2007, The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1960, Transport of Animals Rules 1978, Transport of Animals Rules, Amendment 2001, Transport of Animals on Foot Rules 2001, were not being violated.  Formation of an Investigation Team On 18.11.09, Vinod Phonia, Secy AH, asked the CCF Mr Jai Raj to lead a tem of 6 people to go to Mohaan and investigate and take adequate measures to prevent the cattle from being smuggled for slaughter. The other 5 members in the team were- Mr S.S.Negi (DIG), Dr Ashutosh Joshi (Secy, Animal Welfare Board Of Uttarakhand), Dr Bharat Chandra (Deputy Director AH), Mr S.B.Singla (Member, Animal Welfare Board Of Uttarakhand), Mrs Gauri Maulekhi (People for Animals, and SPCA Dehradun) The team reached Mohan on 20.11.09 and the following observations were made after visiting the Mela site, the border villages of Udham Singh Nagar, where most of the buyers had taken their cattle according to the Mela Receipt book, and after going through the records of Mela available with the Zila Panchayat. ALL the animals that were brought to the fair were bulls. No record was being maintained as to how many animals were being brought to the fair and from where. The number of animals present at the Fair at any given time was over 2,500, but no record of their entry or exit was maintained. The only records available were sale receipts issued by the contractor, and the medical records maintained by the vets since after the GO. No arrangement for feeding, drinking or lairing the animals was made by the contractor of the Fair. Most animals were found to be grossly underfed. The ropes of each animal were secured with large stones. In case of a stampede, it could have led to disastrous results. Until 18.11.09 the only document that a prospective buyer had to produce was a photo ID. From 19.11.09 onwards, Proof of farming (Jot Bahi, Khasra Khatauni) was also asked for. The receipts issued by the mela contractor were not stamped by the Zila Panchayat. The medical records of only 1,427 bulls were made from 8.11.09 to 18.11.09, whereas the unofficial count of animals that were sold at the Fair, was close to 15,000. Since no permission was granted by the DM to allow movement of animals across the border, most animals, according to sale receipts, were taken from the Fair, to villages close to the Border of Uttarakhand, presumably to be smuggled out. Investigation at the addresses mentioned in the receipts, proved beyond doubt that the sold animals were indeed sent for slaughter. Either no animal was found at the buyer address, or the addresses were found to be fake. The Upper Mukhya Adhikari of the Zila Panchayt, Sher Singh Pargain, was aware of sale receipts issued by the mela contractor for animals to be taken to UP, without the necessary sanction by the DM, but failed to take any action against the contractor till 24.11.09. Sher Singh Pargain was also found to be responsible for granting the contract of the Fair to Mohd Tauvar, who had a reputation of being a member of a gang involved in cow smuggling. The leader of this gang, Munauvar, was earlier convicted for 3 years rigorous imprisonment under violation of the Uttarakhand Protection of Cow Progeny Act 2007. In a town with a population of over 1 lakh, also being a tourist hot spot, mere 26 police constables proved to be thoroughly incapable of handling an emergency of this magnitude. The police barriers at Bailpadao and Tedha Gaon had been removed due to paucity of police force, which made passage easier for the smugglers.  Follow-up action The Contract for the Fair stood cancelled on 24.11.09. But the Nainital DM Mr Shailesh Bagoli insisted that the Fair may still be continued by the Zila Panchayat even without a contractor.The Zila Panchayat was given 12 hr time to arrange for feeding, shelter and completely fool proof security for all 3000 animals at the Fair, or face criminal proceedings. The ZP, cracked up and wrote to the DM admitting that managing the mela was not in their capacity. It was late evening by the time he gave such a letter. He was also asked to file a caveat in the Nainital High Court so that the contractor may be prevented from obtaining a Stay Order.A team in Nainital was asked to follow up in court to ensure that the ZP did as told.The process of dismantling the Fair in an organised manner, was to start from 25.11.09. The ZP Upper mukhya adhikari, Pargai, went to the Mela site anyway and announced that the Fair was over and that the farmers may leave with their cattle. Apparently, his intention was to cause a riot like situation among eager buyers and sellers and he partly succeeded in doing so. We strongly suspected that the cattle would fall into the wrong hands at night, so the SSP was asked to depute PAC at the mela site and the PFA volunteers spent the night explaining to the mob why the action taken was good for them and their animals.The next morning, some animals were sent back towards the hills with their owners and some had to be taken to the Bazpur Gaushala. The process continued till 29.11.09.

PFA EXPOSES HIMALAYAN INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCE

UPDATE 13/June/2011  The Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences (HIMS) has been directed to stop experimentation on animals after major anomalies were exposed in the methods of experiments and treatment of animals used.  The Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision of Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA) under the Animal Welfare division of the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests has directed HIMS to stop experimentation on animals till further directions are issued by the CPCSEA. The MoEF Animal Welfare division director and CPCSEA member secretary Anjani Kumar issued this direction based on the report of the inspection of the HIMS animal house facility conducted by the Animal Welfare Board of India northern region sub-committee member and member secretary of the People For Animals (Uttarakhand) Gauri Maulekhi. PFA Uttarakhand has also been directed by the CPCSEA to visit the animal housing facility periodically and to take care of the animals there as a stop gap arrangement. 06/June/2011  : The Cruel practices adopted at the Himalayan Institute have been exposed by PFA and a formal report in this regards has been submitted with the Central and State Government.Some members of the Himalayan Institute of Medical Science while preferring to remain anonymous complained that the departments of Orthopedics, Anatomy and Pharmacology were flouting all rules pertaining to experimentation on animals and that the Dean is, allegedly a sadist who personally likes breaking animal bones and did not encourage any paperwork. Anyone who complained about the terrible conditions was either punished or asked to leave. Suspicions of sadistic activity were confirmed when no anesthesia records, purchase or usage were found with the authorities. The facility was recently inspected by Gauri Maulekhi, Member Secretary People for Animals Uttarakhand and Co Opted Member of the Northern Region of the Animal Welfare Board of India.  Their Orthopedics, Anatomy and Pharmacology Departments were found to be conducting experiments on animals in conditions that would not just hamper furtherance of learning but also misleading The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Govt of India, formed a Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision on Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA) which has formulated rules under section 14 to 20 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1960, which have been criminally flouted by the HIMS. The animals were being kept in filthy conditions that are most likely to provide faulty and misleading results and be a setback for science rather than any form of learning. Some records were not updated for months and most records were found altogether missing. The CPCSEA recommends that the facility where small animals are kept must be air conditioned. At Himalaya, not even fans were functional in the box rooms that animals were housed in. The cages were unscientific and the food and water provided to them was filthy and contaminated with urine and fecal matter. Some rabbits were found to be suffering from scabies but strangely no veterinary help was ever sought by the Dean for any animal. While most animals are killed after the experiments have been conducted, it was shocking to learn that there is no scientific method of rehabilitation of surviving animals. The hospital sweepers are asked to take them to the Chilla forest and leave them there. And the right to continue torturing animals in the name of science is not only morally unacceptable, it is outmoded thinking, bad PR and indicative of the kind of terminal lack of imagination that consigns such industries to the scrapheap of history. The Principal Secretary of Medical Education has been notified about the blaring faults and also the Chief Wildlife Warden has been informed that the Rana Tigrina variety of frogs have been used and sacrificed during experiments at HIMS. The Rana Tigrina is a protected species under Schedule 4 of the Wildlife Protection Act 1972. Thousands of animals have been abused at the HIMS over the past few years. The Ministry of Environment and Forests is now taking a very firm and corrective approach towards such institutes in the State with the help of People for Animals Uttarakhand.

INAMULLA BUILDING RAIDED BY PFA

A day before Bakr Id, People For Animals, Uttarakhand accompanied by a sub inspector and 2 constables, conducted a surprise raid of the infamous Inamulla Building on Gandhi Road. They found that goats and buffaloes were being slaughtered illegally in the lanes and their meat sold in shops on the Shalimar hotel street in the building area.  Five shop keepers admitted on record that they butchered buffaloes and goats on the roadside and sold  the meat in their shops.Slaughtering animals without license is a violation of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 and sections 429, 268 and 269 of the Indian Penal Code. Due to the illegal slaughter of animals on the roadside, the sewers were chocked with animal remains which are also dumped in the open on the street which had created stinking unhygienic conditions that invite various diseases and cause horror and inconvenience to the public.  It is noteworthy that no such raid has ever been conducted on the Inamulla building prior to this and the illegal slaughterhouse has been conducting brisk business for decades and will continue to do so if the police does not take action even after this expose`. Video

ANIMAL SACRIFICE PREVENTED AT CHAMOLI

In the absence of any specific law prohibiting animal sacrifice, villagers in Uttarakhand have defiantly been slaughtering animals in the name of religion, in each of the 13 districts. 
Three such villages were due to perform the ritual on 12th January 2011 in Chamoli. 
On the 11th, a team of PFA reached Karnprayag block of Chamoli where the SDM Dr Lalit Narayan Misra and his Tehsildar Mr C.S. Chauhan had the situation completely under control in the Simli and Tope villages of Karnprayag. 
Their approach was determined and entrepreneurial and they used the correct mixture of firmness and force to get the High Court order implemented. The order clearly says that no animal can be sacrificed in public view 
and no carcasses may be dumped on any land 
public or private. At Simli no animal at all was bought to the temple or the neighboring area and at the Tope village, the sacrificial Panchayati buffalo was tagged and adopted by the villagers after giving an undertaking to the SDM. 
The buffalo will remain with the owner but as State Property. The third location was at village Aali Manjhari in Gairsain. The SDM, tehsildar and other officers were absent from the scene here and the buffalo was being prepared for slaughter. 
The PFA members rose to the occasion and held fort with just 11 constables. 
The DM was informed about the situation. 
We conveyed it to the village leaders and the head priest, who is a serving SI in BSF, that there would be dire consequences if the court order was violated. 
After a whole day’s debate and argument, the 7,000 villagers agreed to give up the sacrificial animal and the buffalo was handed over to the administration. All three mandir Samitis have pledged to completely stop the practice with immediate effect. 
The decisive fact was that not a single animal was sacrificed in any of the three villages on Ashtami, where earlier scores of buffaloes, goats and countless hens were murdered. Mrs Maneka Gandhi earlier spoke to the Chief Secretary Mr. Subhash Kumar and asked him to issue directions to all DMs that animal 
sacrifice needs to be stopped in accordance with the High Court order and a special task force may be deployed in all such areas where there is a possibility of such incidents to happen. The Chamoli success has been a direct result of her clear instructions to the CS. Smt Gandhi even visited 2 blocks in Pauri to campaign against this medieval practice.

PFA EXPOSES HIMALAYAN INSTITUE OF MEDICAL SCIENCE

The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Govt of India, formed a Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision on Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA) which has formulated rules under section 14 to 20 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1960, which have been criminally flouted by the HIMS. The animals were being kept in filthy conditions that are most likely to provide faulty and misleading results and be a setback for science rather than any form of learning. 
sought by the Dean for any animal. While most animals are killed after the experiments have been conducted, it was shocking to learn that there is no scientific method of rehabilitation of surviving animals. The hospital sweepers are asked to take them to the Chilla forest and leave them there. And the right to continue torturing animals in the name of science is not only morally unacceptable, it is outmoded thinking, bad PR and indicative of the kind of terminal lack of imagination that consigns such industries to the scrapheap of history. 
informed that the Rana Tigrina variety of frogs have been used and sacrificed during experiments at HIMS. The Rana Tigrina is a protected species under Schedule 4 of the Wildlife Protection Act 1972. 
Thousands of animals have been abused at the HIMS over the past few years. The Ministry of Environment and Forests is now taking a very firm and corrective approach towards such institutes in the State with the help of People for Animals Uttarakhand.

ILLEGAL MINING STOPPED IN ASAN BARRAGE

The Asan Barrage is a barrage in the Uttarakhand-Himachal Pradesh border region in Doon Valley, (Dehradun District), northern India, situated at the confluence of the Eastern Yamuna Canal and the Asan River and about 11 km (7 mi) from Dakpathar, and 28 km. northwest of Dehradun.(Wikipedia) Thousands of migratory birds are due to arrive at the Aasan Wetland Conservation Reserve in Dehradun next month. The number of birds coming to Uttarakhand forests is diminishing every year because of illegal felling of trees and mining. Our environment is paying the price of the government’s greed! On the 9th of September 2013 members of People for Animals Uttarakhand caught 6 trucks of illegal miners in the heart of the wetland, boldly carrying on with their activity while a forest Ranger was standing on watch. 
A case was registered with the DFO Aasan and the DM Dehradun has ordered an inquiry into the matter. After an investigation conducted by the ADM Dehradun on PFA Uttarakhand’s complaint, the DM Dehradun Sri B.V.R Basava Purushottam cancelled the 13 contracts  for mining in the area with immediate effect on the 14th of September 2013. (image : Sumit Sen)

AWARENESS STALL AT CROSSROADS MALL, DEHRADUN.

“Living free” awareness stall on 15th August at crossroads mall, Dehradun. Live Healthy, Live Humanely, LIVE FREE Are you a non-vegetarian? Yes. 
Then come and let us meet Sonu, a living, breathing, seeing and feeling chicken who is only 40 days old. How would it be like to see him on your plate? He would be one dinner for you, whereas that one dinner would be life itself for him. 
Genetically modified to grow abnormally fast, broilers to gain mass and egg laying chickens to lay nearly an egg a day, packed into a cage with space less than an A4 size of paper for each bird, these animals have some of the most miserable lives in the world. And why? Because we want to fill our stomachs with the life of another. 
Your own health, the surroundings you live in, the global food shortage and global warming can all be attributed to non-vegetarian lifestyle and the mass production of meat for human consumption. 
You have the choice to change now. Live healthy, live humanely and live free. And for those of you are vegetarian, we congratulate you for choosing such a healthy lifestyle. A lifestyle which minimizes harm to other living creatures and to the world as a whole.

APPRAISAL OF 6 CAPTIVE ELEPHANTS | CORBETT TIGER RESERVE

In compliance with the directions and authorisation issued by the Ministry of Environment and Forests, a team of PFA Uttarakhand conducted an appraisal of the overall status and housekeeping of the 6 captive elephants around the Corbett Tiger Reserve, Uttarakhand on 1st and 2nd February 2012. General Health Observations: 1. Majority of the animals inspected were found in dull state. This is because of continuous work, lack of social and enrichment activities. Animals are always tied at one location when not working. 2. Majority of the animals are bathed once or twice a week. This has led to dry and accumulation of dirt over the skin furthermore leading to ecto-parasitic infestation. 3. All the animals have never been dewormed and vaccinated against susceptible diseases. This is jeopardizing the health state of these animals making them exposed to severe diseases like tetanus, rabies and increasing the parasitic load. 4. Many animals show signs of torture. This includes wounds caused by some kind of pointed device over the forehead, base of the ears and hind legs. 5. All mahouts and care-takers of these elephants lack training and therefore standardised protocols for the management of captive elephants is lacking. 6. All the animals suffer from one or the other foot problems which has already led to lameness in majority of the affections. 7. All the animals lack thorough veterinary examination and care. Although shown healthy and sound in the health certificates issued by the local government veterinary officer, presence of abnormal gait, lameness, injuries, and even COMPLETE ONE EYE BLINDNESS (Phoolmala – right eye complete blindness) is evident. These cases emphasize the need of proper veterinary intervention. Therefore issuing of such certificates should be considered against the ethics of veterinary profession. 8. It was also found that tush removal and trimming has been performed without prior notice to the forest department. This has led to severe implications which include infection of the tush root and sale-purchase of ivory. Legal Status: 1. No survey of the captive elephants has ever been conducted by the Uttarakhand state since the date of issue of Guidelines from Project Elephant. 2. Office of the DFO, Ramnagar could provide details of only 7 elephants. 3 of these 7 elephants were missing from the vision while no records or information regarding their relocation was available with the DFO Ramnagar, Sri Shrivastava. A first information report was submitted with the DFO Ramnagar (annexure 1) but as per telephonic conversation on 7.2.2012 at 3pm, with him, the undersigned was informed that no action has been initiated or investigation conducted to find the elephants. The report for the missing elephants has not been lodged yet. 3. The office of the Director, Corbett Tiger Reserve, used to maintain documents of all private captive elephants in the periphery of the CTR till the year 2009. As per their records there were 10 elephants in the area till 2009. (annexure 2). Only 4 of these elephants are still present in the area. No records of their relocation could be found with the forest department. 4. Pawankali kept at Kwality Inn, Kumeria, District Almora, Uttarakhand is an illegal elephant with no record of ownership, 
declaration, health certificate, or any other certificates thereof. Therefore it is subjected for confiscation. 5. Ownership certificate of Kalina (Sh. Shafiq Khan, Jaipur) has been expired. 6. All the certificates issued from Chief Wildlife Warden of Uttarakhand except Laxmi (M/s Khatau International Ltd., Infinity Resort, Dhikuli, Ramnagar) do not provide details about microchip id/number. Therefore a scope of mischief exists. 7. Microchip id/number was only detected from Kalina (Sh. Shafiq Khan, Jaipur) and Phoolmala (Sh. Ata Ur Rehman, Village Lanka Patti, Assam). It must be ensured that microchip number must be accessible from the animals. 8. None of the Mahouts or care-takers have ever been medically examined since no medical check-up certificate has been presented, making elephants exposed to transmission of disease from humans like tuberculosis. 9. Prescribed format for registration certificate of ownership of an elephant as described in the Project Elephant guidelines has not been used in any of the cases. 10. None of the elephant’s owner provided valid health certificate from a veterinary doctor before travel/transportation to Uttarakhand. But most of these owners have ownership certificate from CWLW Uttarakhand. This has been clearly contradictory to the Project Elephant guideline. 11. Two cases were also found wherein tampering with tushes was evident viz., Lakhi (Sh. Moveen Ahmed & Sh. Mateen, Village Dhakka, Tehsil Hasanpur, district J.P. Nagar, Uttar Pradesh) and Laxmi (Sh. Mohd. Aslam, J.J camp, Laxmi Nagar, New Delhi). In both the cases, forest department has not been informed of the act. 12. Most owners take their captive elephant from Uttarakhand to Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Rajasthan, etc, during off – season. Thus, neither do they seek permission from the government authorities for transport to other state nor they inform the authorities for their arrival in Uttarakhand. 13. During the inspection it was found that Forest department has no control over the management and care of these captive elephants. No inspection for checking the records and status of these captive elephants has ever been conducted by the department. 14. It has been noted that address of owners mentioned in the certificates are vague, unreachable and do not confirm the exact 
location of their physical presence. House, street details, voter id and/or pan card details are missing. 15. Project Elephant guideline clearly states the following: “In case any captive elephant is found in any state without valid 
transport certificate, it is liable for confiscation” It was found during the inspection that all the captive elephant do 
not have a transport certificate ever since animals are kept in Uttarakhand. Therefore, all the captive elephant inspected are liable for confiscation. 16. Elephants being Schedule 1 of Wildlife Protection Act of India and despite Project Elephant guidelines, all the owners of captive elephant lack the following: • Purchase documents 
• Valid identification details of the Mahout and care-taker 
• Transportation certificate 
• No-objection certificate to travel from CWLW’s 
• Health certificate before traveling 
• Vaccination/Disease and treatment record 
• Movement/Feeding/Work register Housing and Movement: 1. Most of the cases examined did not provide a continuous supply of potable drinking water to the elephants. 2. Majority of the cases inspected show evidence of use of spiked hobbles, barbed wires along with depriving captive elephants from sufficient shelter and regular access to potable water leading to violation of acts which are tantamount to cruelty to elephants. 3. Most of the elephants are used for work up to 9 hours a day continuously. During this duration these elephants are tied with the saddle exposing the animal to injury and stress but also violating the acts which are tantamount to cruelty to elephants. 4. All the elephants except Lakhi (Sh. Moveen Ahmed & Sh. Mateen, Village Dhakka, Tehsil Hasanpur, district J.P. Nagar, Uttar Pradesh) and Laxmi (M/s Khatau International Ltd., Infinity Resort, Dhikuli, Ramnagar) have been used for rides on NH121 and are always tethered next to NH121. The situation is alarming wherein these elephants are vulnerable to road mishaps. 5. These captive elephants continuously wander across Corbett Tiger Reserve, Ramnagar Forest division and Kosi River. Since these elephants have never been examined, vaccinated or immunized for any susceptible diseases thus, carry a major role in the transmission of diseases among other wild animals. 6. It was found during the inspection that none of the elephant stables except that of Laxmi (M/s Khatau International Ltd., Infinity Resort, Dhikuli, Ramnagar) are suitable for proper management and health of elephants. These are temporary infrastructure and do not provide proper level ground with efficient drainage. Ground was uneven. Elephants were made to stand on the urine and dung leading to foot ailments. No proper cleaning of the stable was noticeable in all the elephant barns. There was no fencing of the elephant’s barn. 
Therefore livestock and dogs can wander even inside the barn. This may possibly lead to exchange of diseases like rabies, tetanus, foot and mouth disease, etc, which could be fatal to the animal. In such stables, elephant is exposed to the effect of wind, frequent chills and rain. It was also discovered that three elephants were missing from the area and the forest or the police departments had no idea whatsoever about their trans-location. Associated Media

PASHUBALI AT DEVIL’S OWN COUNTRY UTTARAKHAND

PFA Uttarakhand stationed itself at Bhookal, 70kms from Pauri Town, armed with the High Court order, hoping to witness an end of the era of savagery. However, that was not to be. What we witnessed was a complete breakdown of the administrative machinery and a sheer lack of will exhibited by the authorities to prevent the gruesome murder of hundreds of innocent creatures in front of thousands of frenzied men women and children and some disillusioned and shocked public. Bhookhal, a part of the Chief Minister Sri Ramesh Pokhriyal’s Constituency, is notorious for the slaughter fiesta it hosts every year in December. Some 5 to 6 thousand animals are butchered by a mob of 30,000 people right under the nose of the administration while the police is busy maintaining “order” and overlooking violation of “law”. Last year’s official count of animals sacrificed was some 3,200 buffalo bulls and he goats. On a PIL submitted in the High Court on Dec 1st this year, the Court imposed two conditions on the ritualistic killings: No animal must be killed in public view, but only in a confined space, and No carcasses may be dumped in any land public or private and must be taken by the owner for his/her personal use. On the night of Dec 10th, we were initially reassured to find 3 companies of  PAC and hundreds of policemen from 6 districts of the State lodged in Thallisain block and nearby area. We went from barrier to barrier and interacted with the forces only to discover that they had no instructions to act against the offenders ! They could only ‘advise’ politely and not use any kind of force at all, according to the briefing given by the IG Garhwal, Mr M.A. Ganpathy. We immediately went to the SP, Mr Pushpak Jyoti and  informed him that the forces were directionless and confused. On the 11th, the day of the mela, some constables on the barriers half heartedly made a sad attempt at convincing the villagers in the morning, till about 10am. The traditional routes around the temple hill were left  unguarded whereas barriers were placed only on the main roads that lead to Chaurikhal. It must be kept in mind that there is no ‘Temple’ as such, only a few rocks on a hilltop that are considered ‘Devi’. Scores of uniformed men were stationed at the hill, and when we saw the first few buffaloes being  brought via the kachcha route, we urged the forces to move ahead and  intercept them before they reached the temple. To our shock, they said that they have no such instructions and they did not budge from their  comfortable grassy spot in the sun. Desperate, and horrified we begged and pleaded, shouted at and cried in front of the SDM Thallisain, ADM, ASP, Tehsildar who were all sitting in armchairs in the Govt Inter College across the temple hill. They did not budge either. I called up the DM who was holding some other hopeless front, and he said he’d reach shortly. The IG Garwal upon being called, replied that he could not order firing at the temple. The middle path of strictly disallowing entry of animals did not occur to him at all ! In the meantime drugged or drunken men women and children had streamed in from all sides and 9 buffaloes were collected at the hill top. There was a  crowd of 30 to 50 people with each animal and each person was carrying a weapon. None were sacrificed yet. We used every trick in the book to hold them off and even succeeded in getting them to tie 9 animals close to the devi. Before the first buffalo was sliced off, I frantically called Rajeev Gupta ji, Principal Secretary, Home, and Forest and Rural Development Commissioner, who is a member of the Animal Welfare Board of India and the Uttarakhand Animal Welfare Board. We had informed him many weeks in advance about the possibility of 5000 animals being slaughtered at Bhookhal, on 11th Dec. However, on that fateful day, all calls to him went unanswered. The mob took over and the first buffalo was hacked by an ecstatic crowd of men and women. Girls danced seductively in front of the dying bulls. Women bathed their children in it’s blood. Children were made to sit on a wall so that they get a clear view of the killing. Young men chased the buffalo for a short distance before it’s fore leg was severed with a sword. A woman nearby declared the Devi alive in her and sunk her teeth in the neck of a living lamb. A man took the severed head of a goat and drank blood from it like one would drink water from a bottle. Within minutes, where ever we looked, heads of goats were rolling or buffaloes were being hacked. It can be safely said that the people who did this, who propose to do this or who let this happen are all mentally unstable, unfit to live in civilized society or anywhere else. They need years of therapy and may still not recover from their criminal mindsets. They are severely diseased with a violent mental ailment but in Uttarakhand, this is far from recognized. Groups like these live in every village in every district and their actions are not considered an aberration but a part of the mainstream lifestyle. The mob through it’s actions not only kills innocent animals but also jeopardizes the lives of many people. The buffalo is a powerful animal and does not give up without a tough fight. Scores are injured. Goats are never taken for a medical examination before they are slaughtered and eaten. Many fall ill, many die. ‘Devi’ is held responsible and deaths go unreported. To resume my narrative – more than 50 policemen who were standing a short distance from the flat hilltop, now found a more comfortable spot elsewhere and continued with their picnic in the mild winter sun. They would have probably slept well had it not been for the loud and hideous noises echoing in the entire region, of dying animals and crazed, vicious humans. I was be-numbed, also paralyzed,  by this time. Pankaj Pokhriyal, the only volunteer who had the time and the courage to be there with me had the presence of mind to keep the camera rolling. We have all their actions on tape. The public hacking, the disposal of the carcasses on the mountain slope where they lay even today, the idle police waiting for orders that never came, the shameless officials making the most of a field day. The noises, the killing, the frenzy, the hysteria, the madness went on for the whole day. When it was almost over, Mr Rajeev Gupta finally came on line and consented to speak with the SP, Mr Pushpak Jyoti. The conversation lasted some 30 seconds and Mr Jyoti went back to his armchair in the sun after handing over the phone to me. Some children showed exemplary courage while the carnage lasted, by shouting slogans “Pashubali band karo” amid a blood thirsty crowd.They were beaten with hockey sticks by the drunken devotees and their clothes were torn in front of 20 policemen. When the children asked for help, the  policemen told them to go to the SP and complain. Unfortunately, they  couldn’t find the SP’s hiding place. At least 500 animals died horrible deaths that day. 50 buffalo bulls, most under the age of 2 years, as per the ‘Devi’s’ preference, and 450 goats at least. The barriers had no meaning. The policemen sat like dead bodies. The officials had no integrity or conscience. It is noteworthy that the CM has sanctioned some 50 lakhs recently for the betterment of facilities at Bhookhal. We now have substantial proof that the court order has been violated on every count and will slap contempt of court upon all the district and state authorities who showed sheer apathy and indulged in a criminal waste of the state’s resources, the police, and the PAC. Their commanders will now have to answer in court.

POULTRY WELFARE WORKSHOP TO BE ORGANISED BY PFA UTTARAKHAND

UPDATE 20/June/2011 :  With the aim to encourage welfare of poultry birds we are seeking to conduct awareness programmes among farmers and breeders. The first such workshop is being organised by PFA on Saturday 9th of July 2011 at Hotel Madhuban, Rajpur Road, from 10 am to 5 pm. The chief speakers at the workshop will be Dr P.V.K. Shashidhar from the National Avian Research Institute and N.G.Jayasimha from the Humane Society International. We expect a gathering of 200 members at the workshop which will include stakeholders of the poultry industry along with representatives from animal welfare organisations and the animal husbandry department. The UAWB will co-host the workshop with PFA. Through the workshop, we wish to highlight the need for cage free farms and other welfare aspects for egg laying hens and abolition of forced molting which have already been shunned in most other countries. The poultry industry, despite it’s humongous scale is not guided or monitored by the government even though it directly affects  public health and sanitation. Ante mortem or post mortem of the birds is rarely done. The result is that there is no check if the meat of sick birds must be finding it’s way into the market, immensely increasing the risk of the spread of zoonotic diseases like bird flu and salmonella infection. Keeping birds in battery cages, a practice that has now been shunned worldwide is still going strong in our State. * * * * * * * * * * * ** * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ** * * * * * * * * * * ** * * * * * * * * * * ** * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ** * * * * 15/June/2011 : 
Transportation of birds is done in extremely inhumane and filthy conditions, by cramming them into metal cages that are mostly unsuitable for the purpose. Every once in a while we can see trucks full of these ill-fated birds pass by us on busy roads. Not many even give it a second glance. The unnatural crowding of animals and their waste in factory farms creates such a strain on the animals’ immune systems that normal body processes like growth may be impaired. A constant influx of antibiotics is resorted to accelerate weight gain by reducing this infectious load. Indiscriminate antibiotics use may select for drug-resistant pathogens that can affect both human and non-human animals. As the bacteria become more resistant to the antibiotics fed to chickens and other animals raised for meat, they may become more resistant to the antibiotics needed to treat sick people. Antibiotics and antibiotic-resistant bacteria can be found in the air, groundwater, and soil around farms and on retail meat, and people can be exposed to these pathogens through infected meat, vegetables fertilized with raw manure, and water supplies contaminated by farm animal waste. The world’s leading medical, agricultural, and veterinary authorities have reached consensus that antibiotic overuse in animal agriculture is contributing to human public health problems. Keeping in mind, poultry birds- the most abused species in the world. People for Animals Uttarakhand has proposed to the Forest and Rural Development Commissioner to co-host a workshop for spreading awareness and educating the stakeholders in the poultry industry regarding the welfare and safety norms. Humane Society International has offered support towards hosting the workshop in Dehradun. The proposal has been accepted and the State Animal Welfare Board and PFA Uttarakhand with the help of HSI will organise the workshop this month. Please  register with us  for updates. Such a workshop will have a very positive impact on the industry and moreover, it has never been organized in the State. People for Animals will be happy to arrange the venue and meals for this event. Humane Society International has offered to send experts on the topic to interact with the participants.

THE FIGHT FOR PAWANKALI FINALLY COMING TO A CLOSURE.

Pawankali, an old elephant illegally kept by a resort called Quality Inn in Kumeria, a few kilometers from the Corbett National Park. The resort owner has no ownership certificate for the elephant. Pawankali shows marks of torture on her body and a recent blood, stool and urine test conducted by the Corbett authorities at PFA’s request, proved that she is suffering from bacterial infection. Her limbs are stiff as her diet is insufficient and she is kept in highly unhygienic conditions. She is used and abused for pleasure rides for tourists and is made to carry passengers on the National Highway alongside trucks and buses. 
After two years of struggle, the CWW has now written a strict letter to the DFO to confiscate the elephant immediately. She will then be kept and cared for in the Corbett National Park. It might still take a few more days. Fingers crossed.

CHAR DHAM YATRA – MULES GET HELP

Good News for the fifteen thousand horses and mules that are employed during the Char Dham Yatra. This year with People for Animals Uttarakhand and their district Units keeping a strict vigil, we see the old patterns shifting, much to the relief of the gentle beasts. 
Following the extensive campaign held by People for Animals Uttarakhand, shedding light on the deplorable conditions in which these animals are made to work, the government has finally issued orders to set up 5 veterinary check posts in the affected areas. These check posts will have a vet on duty with staff and medicines. The letter issued on 12th May by the Director of Animal Husbandry lists the five places as Gangotri and Yamunotri in District Uttarkashi, Govindghat in District Chamoli, Gaurikund in Rudraprayag and Gunji in Pithoragarh. As requested further by People for Animals Uttarakhand, a grant has been sanctioned to the Chief Veterinary Officers to erect hoardings in each of these places. The hoardings will state that anyone who makes an injured, diseased or a weak horse work, or if more weight than permissible is loaded onto a horse or mule, will be acting in  contravention of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act under sections 11(1), 11(2), 29(1), 29(3), 29(5), 35(4), 35(5), 35(6), and 38(3) . There is provision to implicate the owner of the abused animal along with the keeper and the rider. This works as a reminder for pilgrims and other tourists to keep from unknowingly being on the wrong side of law by employing an equine that is in less than perfect shape. We are grateful to the  AWBI  Chairperson for taking a stand on this issue when he visited the state capital recently. 
We request all pilgrims and tourists to please watch out for these animals and do inform us if you notice any  sick animal being used or more weight than 100kgs loaded onto an animal [heading] The authorities that may be contacted are as follows: SP Uttarkashi – 9411112733 
SP Chamoli – 9411112722 
SP Pithoragarh – 9411112082 
[/heading] PhotoCredit: j3ku

21 BULLS SAVED, 7 SMUGGLERS HELD

Twenty one bulls were rescued by People for Animals Uttarakhand today while they were being taken across the state border 
illegally. It was reported by members of PFA that the cattle were being smuggled out this morning. 
A case has been registered with the help of members of the Hindu Jaagran Manch at the Vikasnagar police station and the cattle shall be taken to a shelter at Charba. The organisation was on the trail of smugglers yesterday too when they took help from the Sahaspur thana but the men disappeared into the forest near Sabhawala and could not be found. 
We had earlier written to the Forest department requesting them to keep a strict vigil in the Kalsi range as it is increasingly becoming a safe route for cattle to be smuggled from Uttarakhand to Saharanpur, UP. No cattle had been apprehended by the forest workers till date. Although making provisions to keep and maintain the case property animals is the duty of the state government as per the Supreme Court Ruling made in 2002, Uttarakhand Government has failed to make any shelters for this purpose.  

CASE LODGED FOR KILLING A PUP

A case was lodged by People for Animals Uttarakhand at the Paltan Bazaar police station yesterday when a tempo driver, ran over a puppy at kawali road. The pup was fed by a PFA member Raj Suri and was sitting in front of his shop near the drain when the incident happened. The tempo driver deliberately swerved the vehicle towards the pup on an empty road during early morning and hit the pup intentionally. Thereafter the driver stopped for a moment to laugh at the wailing pup in the most sinister manner, much to the annoyance of onlookers. The license number of the vehicle (UK07A3867) was noted and later a case was lodged under section 429 of the Indian Penal code. The driver is still absconding but once arrested, he will be tried for the offence and may be convicted for upto 5 years. It is little known that mutilating or killing any animal, wild, pet, or even a stary animal is a cognizable offence and may lead to immediate arrest without a warrant. Slaughter for the purpose of food for mankind in a registered slaughterhouse is however the only exemption. 

RENUKA LAKE ZOO FLOUTING RULES

Upon receiving several complaints about the state in which animals were being kept at the Renuka Lake Zoo near Dahahu village in Himachal Pradesh, a team of People for Animals Uttarakhand visited the zoo on 20.6.2011. The Zoo was found to be flouting all rules laid down by the  Central Zoo Authority Timings for the zoo are not observed. We did see visitors even at 8 pm in the Zoo. In contravention of Schedule 3 of rule 10 of the  Recognition of Zoo Rules, 2009  the Zoo is open on all 7 days. The animals do not get even a day to relax in privacy. A male leopard is kept alone in an enclosure. This practice is in contravention of rule 9(4) and 9(4) of rule 10 of the  Recognition of Zoo Rules, 2009 . It is a legal requirement to provide a pair for each animal displayed at the zoo. In case an animal is not paired, it needs to be loaned to some other zoo where it may be housed with another of it’s species. The need to own the leopard seemingly prevented the zoo authorities from allowing it to live a healthier and a more natural life. The visitors are disruptive and they throw empty bottles and other objects into the retiring area of the leopard and into the bear enclosure. The leopard has become irritable and aggressive as a result. No fines are imposed to discourage people from flouting rules. This is in contravention of Schedule 4 of rule 10 of the  Recognition of Zoo Rules, 2009 The Himalayan Black bears became so irritable and aggressive as a result of this that it resulted in serious fights among the 6 of them. A male bear was subsequently removed from the group and has been put in a room which is roughly 5 feet by 5 feet with a very low ceiling. The room has only one grill window which measures only two hand spans in length and breadth. The bear was listless, it could hardly walk and appeared to be  psychologically dead. The chamber has no cooling system and the only source of light and air is this tiny window. This is in contravention of Schedule 5(1) of rule 10 of the  Recognition of Zoo Rules, 2009 Only one out of 6 employees appointed by the Himachal Forest Department has been trained, that too, as briefly as one week. This is in contravention of Schedule 5(6) of rule 10 of the  Recognition of Zoo Rules, 2009 Recognition of Zoo Rules, 2009 in Hindi We have highlighted these most serious charges with the relevant authorities in the  Himachal Pradesh Forest Department  through Sri Jai Raj, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forest, Uttarakhand. We have also lodged a complaint with the Animal Welfare Board of India to take adequate steps to bring respite to the Black Bear which is locked up in a dark box room and the leopard, which is constantly tormented by visitors even in the retiring room on top priority.

BECOME A PFA MEMBER

People For Animals is a registered trust in India and a non-profit body involved in animal care. If you love animals, are sensitive towards animal welfare and want to help them lead a better, safer life, JOIN US. Membership Fee Details Student Member  ………Rs. 50/- per year Working Member ….…. Rs. 100/- per year Life Member ………….. Rs. 2000/- per year  Donor ………………..…Rs. 10,000/- per year Please download the  Membership Form  and send it along with your membership fee. 
You can pay your membership fee by cash or a Cheque/DD in the name of “ ”, payable at Dehradun and please send it to:  D-4, Chandralok,  Dehradun – 248001  Uttarakhand. India.  [p] 91-97-2000-7817  [e] gmaulekhi@gmail.com

184 GOATS SAVED

 We learnt that there is a practice of bringing goats in trucks from Rajasthan and Meerut to Dehradun. Our night patrol team was able to stop one such truck in Patel Nagar Dehradun, on 3  April. When the animals were offloaded at the police station, we discovered that there were 184 goats in the standard 6 wheeler vehicle. A case was registered and the case property was handed over to PFA. We obtained permission to use a defunct Kanji house to lodge the animals. The Judicial Magistrate, however, ordered the case property to be kept in the custody of the owner. We have challenged the decision in the district court.

PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF CENTURY PULP AND PAPER MILL IN UTTARAKHAND

Background 
Century Pulp and Paper Mill situated in GhanshyamdhamPO Lalkua District Nainital, Uttarakhand, India 
has been operational since 1980 and has been unleashing highly toxic liquid and solid waste into the 
reserve forest adjoining it. A huge flow of untreated toxic effluent is flushed out of the Mill on the eastern 
side into a stream that earlier was the source of drinking water. In addition to this, at least 50 trucks full of 
highly acidic ash and other waste that is dumped on forest and revenue land by the mill, everyday have 
resulted in: Death blow to all cattle and other animals that drink the contaminated effluent either directly from the stream or from any other ground water source where the contamination has surfaced. A high incidence of human deaths by jaundice in the region. The area being declared critically sensitive for tuberculosis by the Health Department. Loss of fertility in agricultural fields Contamination of ground water to the extent that hand-pumps situated many kilometers away from the mill are producing foul smelling yellowish water, unfit for man or beast. Brushed under the carpet 
Numerous complaints from residents of the vicinity of Century Pulp and Paper Mill, Lalkuan, have fallen 
on deaf ears. Few officers who conducted a formal or informal inquiry into the matter were hurriedly 
transferred or hushed up. No action has ever been taken by the Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board 
against a mill that is the single largest source of deadly pollutants and diseases in the Haldwani Region 
and has caused rampant spread of deadly diseases and untimely deaths of humans and animals. 
As per information received from the locals, SDM Sri Shakuntala Gautam, SDM Siddharth Mahajan, 
SDM Sirish Kumar took steps against the toxic pollutants being emitted from the Mill but no laboratory 
reports were ever made public, nor were any steps taken to curb the flow of toxins being blatantly 
unleashed on the environment. RECENT INVESTIGATION BY PEOPLE FOR ANIMALS UTTARAKHAND On 24th August 2013 at 5:30 PM on Bareilly Road, Haldwani, a team of People for Animals Uttarakhand 
forced a dumper carrying white ash to stop. On questioning the driver, it was confirmed that the toxic 
white ash was brought from Century Pulp and Paper Mills and was taken to Pal Stone Crusher, Bareilly 
Road Haldwani, to deposit into an illegally dug stone mine in their premises. This connivance between 
the two enterprises was helping fill up illegal mines and dispose at least 40 dumpers full of toxic solid 
waste everyday. The police were immediately informed. 
The police brought the truck to the Lal Kuan Police Station. A FIR was lodged against Century Pulp and 
Paper Mills and Pal Stone Crusher. 
A sample of white amorphous foul smelling ash was collected and sealed. One sample was kept in the 
custody of the police, another sample was given to PFA Uttarakhand and the third sample was sent by the 
police for toxicology testing. On 25th August 2013 at 10:30AM upon paying a visit was to Rajiv Nagar, a residential area adjacent to 
the Century Pulp and Paper Mill on the East side, startling discoveries were made. It was found that 
Century Pulp and Paper Mill flushes out humongous amounts of untreated, stinking, unthinkably toxic 
and frothy water into a stream flowing through the agricultural fields of Rajiv Nagar. The stream flows on 
towards Shastri Nagar, Gandhi Nagar, Jawahar Nagar and joins the Gola Nadi which flows into 
Ramganga and finally into the Ganga. 
The soil of the agricultural fields in the area appeared cracked even during the height of monsoon. The 
produce appeared limp and yellow. The area was covered in a suffocating smog and the stench from the 
effluent was unbearable even from a considerable distance.    The residents demonstrated how the water of the various hand-pumps in the area were also affected by the 
toxic flow seeping into the soil. Clearly, the ground water had gotten deeply contaminated. They also 
pointed out that the mid day meals for the school children of Prathmik Vidyaley Rajic Nagar had to be 
made with the yellowish, contaminated, untreated water that came from a nearby hand-pump. 
Deaths due to diseases related to pollution were extremely common in the area. Last year alone, 30 people 
died of waterborne disease in the small settlement. Incidence of Jaundice, dengue, tuberculosis have 
been alarmingly high in the region. The Ghoranala region of Rajivnagar, which faces the maximum fury 
of this chemical waste has been declared as a sensitive zone for tuberculosis. A complaint was lodged in the Lalkuan Police station with statements from 20 residents stating that apart 
from the toxic white ash that Century Pulp and Paper Mills dumps in the forest, revenue and stone crusher 
land, they also dump huge quantities of untreated and toxic water into a stream called Ghodanala which 
was earlier used for drinking water and irrigation purposes and was now transformed into a death trap of 
pollution and disease for the entire neighborhood of Rajivnagar and beyond. On 26th August 2013 the DFO was informed of illegal dumping by Century Pulp and Paper Mill on the 
forest land near Haldwani Rudrapur road. Three truckloads of waste untreated pulp had been dumped on 
the forest land due to which a huge Sagon tree had started to dry up. A case was lodged against Century 
Pulp and Paper Mills by the forest department. 
It was informed by residents that this occurance was not uncommon and the untreated waste of the 
Century Pulp and Paper Mill was being dumped without compunction all over the Bareilly Road and 
Rudrapur Road in Haldwani especially at Pal Stone Crusher, Bareilly Road, Haldwani. The pictures 
below reveal the extent to which the large valleys dug up illegally at the Stone crusher mill are being 
filled up with the toxic waste of the paper mill thereby contaminating the ground water and making the 
entire region to become unstable. DELIBERATE ADMINISTRATIVE LAPSES 
Upon witnessing the terrible conditions in the village and taking into account the complaints received 
from locals, PFA Member Secretary demanded the SSP Nainital for immediate action to prevent the flow 
of effluent from the mill and get samples of soil and water from the surrounding area to be duly collected 
and sent for toxicology testing to a sophisticated laboratory such as the Indian Toxicology Research 
Institute, Lucknow. The SSP refused to send a team for collection of samples for a toxicology test saying 
that this was out of his jurisdiction. At 11:00 am the DM Nainital was informed and he agreed to send a 
team. 
The sampling team constituted SDM Harbir Singh and a Scientist from the Environment and Pollution 
Control Board. They deliberately delayed reaching Rajiv Nagar till late in the afternoon. In the meantime, 
they informed the Mill authorities and gave them time to manipulate the flow and flush considerably 
cleaner effluent into the nallah before the sample could be collected. 
This clearly points out at a malicious collaboration between the administration and Century Pulp and 
Paper Mills. 
Samples of tap water, hand-pump water and the effluent from the Nallah were collected in unclean plastic 
jars bought from the open market and taken to the Lalkuan Police Station. 
The standard procedures for sealing bottles for sampling were not followed and the witnesses from the 
village were informed of this. With this information they refused to sign the bottles. The Scientist from 
the Pollution Control Board was questioned why he did not follow the prescribed protocol for collecting 
samples. He stated that he was only asked to accompany the SDM and had no information that samples 
had to be collected. This points out at a deliberate miscommunication to obstruct the prescribed procedures 
from taking place. The protocol for collection of samples as prescribed under the No sterilized bottles were used in the collection of samples. The samples were not labeled as per procedure. No witnesses were made to sign or statements recorded. A control sample was not provided to the complainant. The samples were not preserved as prescribed in the Manual available on the website of the Central Pollution Control Board. It is strange, however, how the District authorities and the Pollution Control Board of 
Uttarakhand have so far not just ignored but shamelessly assisted in covering up this horrendous 
irregularity which has caused innumerable animal and human deaths and irrepairable degradation 
of the environment of this critically sensitive Tarai Region. RECOMMENDATIONS 
In the interest of the Environment, the residents and the livestock and wild creatures that inhabit the Tarai 
Region, the following measures need to be undertaken expeditiously: The Century Pulp and Paper Mill, Lalkuan has become a serious threat to the heath and safety of the residents and the environment of the area. It cannot be allowed to function in the current manner. It must be sealed immediately so that further damage may be prevented. The untreated effluent and solid waste coming out of the mill must be stopped at once till it has been ensured that all treatment plants are fitted, functional and in use all the time. Pal Stone Crusher, Barelilly Road Haldwani must be sealed and a detailed high level inquiry must be set up to assess the damage and prosecute the owner for the irreparable damage caused to the environment.

KEDARNATH RESCUE EFFORTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF PFA’S LONG TERM SUGGESTIONS FOR THE CHAR DHAMS

Introduction to the rescue efforts: 
The majority of rainfall that caused the calamity in Uttarakhand took place on the 15th, 16th and 17th of June. After finding out that the Animal Husbandry Department of Uttarakhand or any NGO in the area could not provide accurate information about the condition of animals in the Kedarnath Valley or the amount of livestock affected, People for Animals Uttarakhand took the initiative in the animal rescue efforts. The team arrived in Guptkashi on the 22nd of June. After assessing the situation by visiting Gaurikund, interacting with horse owners in the affected areas and trying to comb the area on foot we changed our initial rescue approach from first aid to constructing the infrastructure required to open up routes for stranded horses and directly rescuing stranded mules. Below is a video of the rescue efforts of the first team- PFA Uttarakhand : The Lost Mules of Kedarnath Construction of a temporary bridge at Sonprayag: 
A makeshift bridge had been constructed by the locals across Songanga at Sonprayag. During a night of heavy rainfall it was washed away destroying the only direct land route for mules from Gaurikund to Songprayag and the lower regions. After the situation was assessed on ground by the People for Animals Uttarakhand team, People for Animals Chairperson Smt. Maneka Gandhi contacted Lieutenant General Chaint, the army commander in-charge of rescue operations. After contact with the People for Animals Uttarakhand team, the army constructed a bridge within two days, reinforced well enough to carry the weight of mules. This was the only bridge that was made for animals in the entire region by the administration. Within hours the word spread across the entire area that the bridge had been made and the next day the first groups of mules started emerging. Hundreds of mules have been evacuated from the region using the bridge. People for Animals Uttarakhand hired men to rescue as many mules as possible. Spreading the message of compassion and conveying information through the media:  
Spreading the message of compassion during this time was a crucial requirement and at the same time a very delicate task. During the 12 days spent in the areas from Kedarnath to Guptkashi, whether it was during breakfast, during a shared taxi journey or during rescue efforts, whether we were standing waiting for our phones to be charged or if a media team was nearby, the People for Animals Uttarakhand team with Gauri Maulekhi as the spearhead brought up the topic of the plight of the mules with everyone at all hours of the day. Assessing the situation in Kedarnath: 
From the 30th of June to the 2nd of July, two members of People for Animals Uttarakhand, after writing an undertaking, stayed at Kedarnath. At the time all humans had been evacuated and there was no police or army deployment in the area. We were the first animal related team to assess the situation in Kedarnath and all the information collected in the region was conveyed to the outside world. Multi-pronged efforts: 
The Sadbhavana team did a wonderful job by providing medical aid to injured horses coming down from Gaurikund and the lower regions near Guptkashi. There was also a collaboration with Prahar to rescue a stranded horse at Sonprayag. Mission Rambada: 
A team of People for Animals Uttarakhand, comprising of a leading architect Mr Jain with experience in bridge building, two trained masons and two volunteers headed to Rambada for a mission which turned out to be a week long mission in the eye of the storm. Also, a damaged helipad at Bhimbali was made wider by making a retention wall and flattening it.  The organization was supported by a group of local individuals and a cash prize of Rs 50,000 was awarded by PFA to this group for their assistance. The award was presented by the Rehabilitation Commissioner at Guptkashi after the successful mission. Below is a video of the rescue efforts during Mission Rambada - PFA Uttarakhand : Mission Rambada Mission Jangal Chatti : After Rambada another team was sent to Jangal Chatti to rescue the remaining mules. Long Term Action: 
On returning to Dehradun, Gauri Maulekhi wrote a letter to the Secretary of the Government of Uttarakhand – “Observations and suggestions for maintenance and welfare of working animals in the Uttarakhand hills with special emphasis on tourism in the Char Dham.” On September 15th the Livestock Development Department, which is looking after the rehabilitation of mules in all the Char Dhams, informed us that PFAs observations and suggestions in the comprehensive report submitted with the Uttarakhand government have been accepted and the government is making due provisions for infirmaries and night shelters as suggested.

STRAY CATTLE MANAGEMENT PLAN

PFA Uttarakhand urged the state government to adopt a scheme of creating dry dairies in 1000 van panchayats. If each of these shelters kept 70 uneconomic cattle, the entire stray animal problem in the state will be resolved. We even indicated all the possible sources of funding for these shelters. The Times of India highlighted it as the cover page story.Weeks later, we learnt that the scheme has been adopted by the Gujrat Government as ‘animal-hostel’, though the objective of the same is milk production.  The detailed stray cattle management plan is as follows As per the 17th National Livestock Census conducted by the Government of  India, Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Animal Husbandry and  Dairying, with 15th October 2003 as the reference date, there are 22  lakh bovines (cow and it’s progeny) in Uttarakhand. Out of these, 3.4% (70,000) are uneconomic cattle i.e. old, dry,  stray, unproductive animals, which are currently on the roads of our  towns and cities. Each year the number grows exponentially. 
In 2007, Uttarakhand Cow and it’s Progeny Protection Act came into force in which states in Section 9 that 
” The State Government and NGOs may establish institutions as may be necessary for taking care of uneconomic cow progeny.” Also,  out-of-State disposal of cattle has been restricted with the help of  the aforementioned Act. The number of homeless cattle has been growing  and is likely to become a serious cause for concern in the near future.  The State Government is yet to design an effective policy or strategy to  deal with these animals which are a potential traffic hazard and are  perceived as a social inconvenience. There is no State owned shelter or pound for cattle. Since 2007  till date, less than 2,500 uneconomic cattle have been housed with the  help of all the different NGOs in Uttarakhand in 40 to 50 different Gau  Sadans. The target of 70,000 remains distant as ever. The present policy  has been able to deal with 3.5%of the problem in 4 years. The following is the only possible solution to the problem of stray cattle in the State: 
Uttarakhand  Govenment has more than 10,000 Van Panchayats in the state scattered  all over the 13 Districts. Each of these bodies has land, manpower and  resources. If any 1,000 of these Van Panchayats were to be instructed to  establish Gau Sadans, possibly with the help of local NGOs, and keep an  average of 70 animals each, the entire stray cattle problem of the  State will be solved. Merits of the Scheme: No free roaming cattle in the towns and cities of Uttarakhand. Power generation through the collected biomass waste of these animals. Production of Manure with the help of the slurry or through  vermi-composting which may be used in organic horticulture farms (high  priority on state agenda) or state tea gardens. Soil health improvement may be sought by housing cattle on the fringes of forests where land is barren or requires treatment. Protection against losses by stray cattle to agricultural and forest crops. Methane Management by collecting the biomass (dung and urine) of the  animals will contribute towards combating global warming.  Uneconomic cattle may be converted to economic ones by collecting their biomass for the production of Panchgavya. No transfer of land may be required at all. The following may be some of the possible sources of funding for these Van Panchayat Gau Sadans:  UREDA (Uttarakhand Renewable Energy Development Agency) – for installing Biogas plants. Ayush Department Government of India – for production of Panchagavya Forest Department – for Methane Management and soil health treatment and regeneration of barren land  Agriculture Department – for production of organic manure Animal Welfare Board of India – for establishing animal shelter Uttarakhand Animal Welfare Board – for establishing cow shelter MLA fund, MP fund, Gram Panchayat Fund, Zila Panchayat Fund, Vikas  Khand Fund, Municipal Board Fund – for management of social nuisance by  stray cattle. Keeping in mind the fact that thousands of cattle are smuggled out  of Uttarakhand for slaughter in Haryana and Uttar Pradesh, it has become  necessary to protect the free roaming cattle by housing them and to  establish identification of all such animals by means of Radio Frequency  Identification Technology as per section 8 of the Uttarakhand Cow  Progeny Protection Act 2007.

MASS SLAUGHTER IN 25 TEMPLES STOPPED FOR GOOD.

After getting a favorable judgement from the Uttarakhand High Court on 19th Dec 2011, we have been able to successfully end animal sacrifice in the following prominent temples. We had to personally struggle with a few, whereas some others were tackled by the district administration after written complaints filed by us. 
Mass slaughter in these temples has stopped for good : 
a) Chitai Temple – Almora 
b) Kalinka Tample – Bageshwar 
c) Bhaunadevi Temple – Almora 
d) Sangarh Temple – Bageshwar 
e) Mahakali Temple – Gangolihat Pithoragarh 
f) Nandamai Temple – Kapkot Almora 
g) Mahakali Temple – Daundiyukhal Pauri 
h) Kaal Bhairav – Bageshwar 
i) Bhagwati Kokila Temple – Pithoragarh 
j) Daundiyu Mela – Pauri 
k) Nanda Devi Temple – Chamoli 
l) Bhukhal – Pauri 
m) Bhadrakali Temple – Dehradun 
n) Chaiti Temple – Udham Singh Nagar 
o) Purnagiri – Champawat 
p) Mundaneshwar – Pauri 
q) Khairaling Temple – Pauri 
r) Daat Kali Temple – Dehradun 
s) Santala Devi – Dehradun 
t) Maso Temple – Pauri 
u) Mansari Temple – Pauri 
v) Barahi Dham – Devi Dhura 
w) Nanda Devi – Karnprayag – Chamoli 
x) Maithan Temple – Chamoli 
y) Nanda Devi – Gopeshwar – Chamoli Nanda Devi – Nainital will have to follow suit.

SAFAR EK RUPAYE KA (SERK)

Millions of helpless animals need your help. This is an appeal to all of us who need to respond to the reality that while we are engrossed in the pleasures of our consumerist lifestyle, millions of helpless animals are dying of hunger, lack of care, accidents and cold in the winters. 
Please pledge your support to these animals who are looking at you for a little warmth, a little food to survive, and a little care of live their lives happily. PLEDGE I am a concerned citizen; and would like to support PFA Uttrakhand, through the SERK program. Please contact me to discuss how this can be implemented in my organization. fill in your details  here so that we can contact you. Thank you for your kindness.

REGISTRATION OF BOVINES AT KHUSHAALPUR | A FIRST OF ITS KIND IN UTTARAKHAND

On 6.11.11, PFA Uttarakhand conducted a registration campaign in Village Khushaalpur in the Sahaspur Thana area. The bovines that were suspected to be slaughtered on Eid were all registered with the police so that their kurbaani could be prevented and they may be traceable even months from now. Khushaalpur has been notorious for being one of the topmost suppliers of beef in the region, so we feared for the safety of the animals in the charge of residents of Khushaalpur a day before Eid. The animals, however, could not be confiscated as there were no sufficient grounds to prove any crime proposed. Tagging and registration of cattle is compulsory as per the Section 8 of the Gau Sanrakshan Adhiniyam but none had been ever registered so far. We convinced the police to accompany us to the village and register the animals as we took photographic proof of the animal with it’s owner for records. We covered more than 50 animals this way and threatened the owners that we would for the presence of the same animals a week later. It was the first time any crude form of registration of cattle was ever done in Uttarakhand.

ILLEGAL DOG BREEDING TRADE BUSTED

Dog breeders have been routinely flouting rules and regulations and so far no dog breeder in Dehradun has got his establishments registered with the Animal Welfare Board of India, Ministry of Environment and Forests, as per rules laid down in the Animal Birth Control Rules 2001 under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animal Act 1960. The dogs that they breed, were found suffering from various diseases and due to overcrowding and lack of exercise and grooming, their general health conditions have been found to be deplorable. Breeds such as St. Bernard and Chow Chow or the English Mastiffs that require high maintenance and special care are kept in small cages without even so much as a fan. The four offenders that have been nabbed by People for Animals Uttarakhand, Juhi of Arvind Marg, selling pups by the name of Dog Castle, where pups were found rolling in their own excreta and struggling to avoid flies. Tito a dog breeder who runs a pet shop at Ring Road by the name of Baba pet store was another offender who was found keeping close to 150 pups and their mothers in two average sized rooms in his Nathanpur farm. The dogs at his establishment were badly diseased and infected with mange and many were suffering from fever which could be an indication of parvo or canine distemper, the most dangerous diseases among dogs. Prem Singh Chauhan near IT Park who has sold dogs with no regard to the health of the bitches in used for this purpose, keeps pups in his toilet that has an indian style toilet and the pups frequently fall into the pot from where they are pulled out. Kapil a breeder who works for IBM in Uttarakhand was found selling not just pups but also fish and birds, all without a license. Pups were found crammed in small cages at his establishment and he carries on his business shamelessly. Since individuals can get away with investing very little in this business, it doesn’t hurt them much to have high mortality at their establishments. All pups from all litters do not find a buyer and giving them away for free would be bad for business so mortalities are considered necessary and part of the deal. The breeders were informed in January this year, in a meeting held at the office of the Chief Veterinary Officer, Dehradun in January, to register their breeding dogs and studs in AWBI and duly microchip them but in failing to do so even after 6 months, Animal Welfare Board Co-opted member and Team PFA Uttarakhand, took legal action against 4 such breeders and more will be booked in due course of time. Related media

FIR AGAINST THE DEAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT UNIT

PFA Uttarakhand lodged an FIR against the EMU Incharge of Defence Electronics Application Laboratory for conducting a dog culling drive against the law and also jeopardising the lives of numerous residents by his criminal act. On 9th July 2011, it was discovered by some members of People for Animals that healthy and sterilised stray dogs had been hogties and dumped in deep ditches by the Estate management Unit of Defence Electronics Application Laboratory, Dehradun, within their campus area and were preparing to transport the animals to some far off location. 
Looking at the condition of the animals and the manner in which they were tied, it was difficult to say if they could have survived any longer had they not been given relief instantly. Some of the dogs showed signs of internal bleeding possibly due to acute injuries inflicted while they were being barbarically captured. 
The instructions to catch the dogs, tie them up in the most inhumane manner and finally dump their bodies in some far away jungle were given by the in charge of the Estate management Unit of Defence Electronics Application Laboratory, Dehradun, Mr S.S.Rawat. 
His actions were not just illegal and against the orders issued by the Delhi High Court and the Stay order issued by the Supreme Court but also jeopardised the lives of the residents of the DEAL Colony. The dogs have been taken to the PFA Dehradun hospital for treatment. If stray dogs are removed from an area, the problem that the residents face will not decrease but will multiply many times. The vacuum thus created will attract many more dogs from other areas and there will be fresh fights for territory thereby increasing the number of dog bites. 
The only solution for this problem is Animal Birth Control as laid down under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act by the Indian Parliament. It is our duty and responsibility to adhere to it.

VACCINATION AND DEWORMING CAMP

A free vaccination and deworming camp was held by PFA Uttarakhand with the SPCA Dehradun. Over 50 dogs kept by residents of villages near Canal Road, Dehradun were inoculated against rabies and dewormed.  A vet was also available at the camp for free consultation. Most pet owners were ignorant about vaccines and the need for deworming and this was the first time that their dogs were getting their shots. The activity has helped them to be more aware about their pets and to seek medical help when needed. The vaccines were sponsored by Dr Manish Patel and the deworming medication was sponsored by  Psychotropics India Limited

BAN BATTERY CAGE FOR CHICKENS

(  Bihar Times ) In  2012 battery cages for chickens will be formally outlawed in the Europe Union. Finland, Switzerland, Germany, Austria and Norway have already banned battery hen cages. This decision comes as a result of the sustained campaigns by millions of Europeans. Unfortunately in India, the animal welfare groups have not yet taken up the cause of animals raised for food. Fifteen years ago, I went to court to protest the working of Idgah, the main slaughterhouse of Delhi. The Supreme Court shut it down. Fifteen years later an even worse one has come up. But now no one complains because the butchers have learnt their lesson and become partners with their MP and the state government. Consequently no one is allowed to enter it, film anything or look at the records which are been faked everyday to show one tenth of the animals that are actually being killed. The Supreme Court passed a direction three years ago ordering the Animal Welfare Board of India to inspect all the slaughterhouses. A man on the Board took on the duty to inspect the ones in Kerala. He traveled in a car owned by the butchers. He stayed at posh hotels and he never saw the inside of a single slaughterhouse before he filed his report that “All Izz Well”. He was caught by animal welfare activists when filing fake bills. He is no longer on the Board. But not a single inspection has taken place since. There are two areas where the animal welfare movement needs to turn its attention to : the cruelty in professional poultries and the traffic and killing of cattle. While there are thousands of things wrong with the way chickens are reared, one cruelty which can be removed easily if we all get together and campaign is the battery cage for chickens. India’s factory farms confine 140 to 200 million hens in battery cages and there is little “cage-free rearing of chickens.” Last month the the Dalai Lama has condemned battery hen farming and is urging consumers to switch to buying eggs from chickens kept outside of cages. ” Turning these defenseless animals into egg-producing machines with no consideration for their welfare whatsoever is a degradation of our own humanity, ” the Buddhist spiritual leader said ” Switching to cage-free eggs would reduce the suffering of these animals.” Most caged birds have less than the size of an A4 sheet of paper to move on. They cannot even raise their wings or turn around. Their suffering turns into anger and they try to bite the bird next to them. But they cannot because, anticipating this, the poultry owner has cut off their beaks and their toes with hot knives and no anesthesia.  They live and die in agony “The abuse we inflict on hens has always been particularly disturbing to me and I have always been particularly concerned toward how these animals are treated in industrial food production” says the Dalai Lama. I came across a beautiful letter written by an Australian. I thought you should read it: “I heard a person arguing with another. She said: You want all the dogs to be tied up all the time. Fine. But since we know that dogs feel and behave as humans, as an experiment, let’s try replacing the word “dog” with the word “uncle”. Would you feel the same way ? It got me thinking. What if we followed the logic consistently? For example: Replace the word “calf” with “daughter”.  Would we still crush her rib cage and kill her? 
Replace the word “Sheep” with “sister”. Would we still terrify, traumatize and send her to be stabbed to death? 
Replace the word “Chicken” with “child”. Would we cage her so she couldn’t move, burn off her lips, and kill her as soon as we had forcibly fattened her beyond recognition? 
Replace the word “cow” with “mother”. Would we still drag her screaming on a chain to the kill floor and hack her body into bits, while her friends watched in horror? Replace the word “food” with “friend”. Would we still torture and kill TWO BILLION of our friends every week? Think of them as humans in another form . That doesn’t mean you get silly and dress up your dogs. It doesn’t mean beds with linen, hundred-dollar dresses, obesity-inducing diets, nail polish spas, handmade soap and doggie mascara. It means you start thinking of chickens, pigs, cows, buffaloes, goats who are crammed into small spaces, fed rubbish and then killed after breaking all their limbs in overloaded trucks. Frightened babies are torn from their distraught mothers. Chickens have their beaks cut off; cows have their horns pulled from their heads; pigs are castrated—all without painkillers. Then they are herded into filthy, slippery transport trucks and taken to slaughterhouses where they are strung up by their legs and their throats are slit. Even if you are vegetarian, what are you doing against these horrifying crimes? What will your answer be? 
The first thing we need to demand is that the Indian Ministry for Agriculture and Animal Husbandry put down the law to order all poultries to keep only cage free birds. Cage-free does not always mean “cruelty-free” but cage-free hens generally have 250 percent to 300 percent more space per bird and are able to act more naturally than caged hens. If Europe can do it so can we. 
To join the animal welfare movement contact  gandhim@nic.in Original article  by Maneka Gandhi

FREE MEDICAL AND AWARENESS CAMP

A Free Medical and Awareness Camp was held at Lakarmandi on the 4th of August, organised by People for Animals Uttarakhand. A group of boys from The Doon School joined PFA Uttarakhand for the camp.

DEHRADUN BHANDARI BAGH SLAUGHTER HOUSE RAID

As you may already be aware, Slaughter House Rules 2001 framed under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act lay down how a slaughter house has to be built and operated. It is with regret that we inform you that the Bhandari Bagh Slaughter House run by Nagar Nigam Dehradun is violating these rules on every single count. Upon a surprise visit to the shelter on 14.12.2011, we found shocking conditions at the slaughter house. The following are our observations: 
1) As per law a vet can perform mandatory health check up of animals not more than 12 animals in an hour i.e not more than 96 animals in an 8 hr work schedule. At the slaughter house, though Dr Mrigesh Chaudhary performs health check up of more than 250 animals in one single hour or even less time. 
2) The fitness form prescribed by the Government of India has not been filled for a single animal at the slaughter house, ever. 
3) The animals were being slaughtered by unlicensed individuals whose age and health records were not kept by the nagar nigam. Some of these individuals appeared to be minors and two of them appeared to suffer from breathing problems. 
4) The instruments that were being used to butcher the animals were unsterilized and were found lying amid pools of blood, viscera and gastric content. 
5) There was no arrangement of hot water or even clean water for washing purposes. A dirty, smelly, brown, liquid filled in a cement tank was being used to clean the meat, thereby contaminating it further. 
6) Stunning of animals before slaughter has never been practiced at this slaughter house and even the equipment to perform this mandatory procedure has not been procured by the Nagar Nigam. 
7) The animals were being slaughtered in plain view of each other, even 30 to 35 at a time in each room 
8 ) Blood, parts of the viscera, gastric content and other refused parts had chocked the drains thereby forming pools of muck in each room and was splashing onto other animals. 
9) The meat was spread out on the floor for dressing with complete disregard for cleanliness. 
10) It was found that many diseased looking animals had been slaughtered in the absence of a veterinary checkup. Alarmingly, fetuses of unborn lambs were found among refused parts indicating conclusively that pregnant animals were being slaughtered too. 
11) No post mortem examination of the viscera was being done at all. The vet was found to be absent from duty when the animals were being cut open. Thus allowing the possibility of the meat of diseased animals to be taken for sale unchecked. 
12) No cap has been set by the Nagar Nigam, on the number of animals that can be slaughtered at the slaughter house in a day. 
13) No lairages or isolation pens for sick animals were found. Animals were being slaughtered immediately after arrival. 
14) The hides of the animals were found to be spread out in front of the slaughter house possibly for drying and some were being taken away on bicycles in an open, exposed manner in plain view. 
15) The slaughter house does not have a boundary wall, so the dogs and other animals in search of food move freely about, even in the rooms while slaughter is in process. 
16) The building was found to be made of material that was difficult to clean, the walls were splattered with blood and muck and were not made of washable material, the doors were rusted and there was no tiling or proper slope to allow cleaning. Considering that the produce of this slaughter house is being consumed by the population of Dehradun, it is crucial that the hygiene, sanitation and health aspects are kept under a strict vigilance of able officers. In the face of such blatant violations being discovered at the slaughter house, the officer who was in charge must be immediately suspended and a case be booked against him for gross negligence and for putting in danger, the lives of thousands of people everyday. It is only a matter of estimate that how many people in the city must have fallen ill or died due to consumption of contaminated meat and the matter could not be traced back to the correct root of the tragedy till now. 
We request you to take action in the matter most urgently. 
Member Secretary, PFA Uttarakhand. 
Co Opted Member Member, Animal Welfare Board of India.

GUIDELINES FOR THE PEOPLE FOR ANIMALS GOOGLE GROUP

The People for Animals Google group is a meeting point of all units and supporters of People for Animals. A platform where information regarding policies, systems, laws, judgments, case studies etc can be exchanged and views shared. All emails on the People for Animals googlegroups will be posted which uphold the objectives of People of Animals –  http://www.peopleforanimalsindia.org/about-pfa.html Here is some guidance to note before posting and to make the group more effective: 1. In reply to a post, if you press “reply” the post actually goes to the entire group and not to the sender. If you would like to respond only to the sender, please copy the email address of the sender from the message and past in the “to” bar. 2. Typically we do not post messages like – I agree, thank you etc. Please post such messages directly to the sender using the steps stated above. 3. If you are posting an article from a link, please copy and paste the article in the email, in addition to providing the link. 4. Please use the subject line to describe the content of your post. Eg. Illegal cow sacrifice stopped, Mumbai dog please help. This will enable interested readers to access your posting. If the subject line is not accurate, it is likely that the post may be deleted by the reader from his/her inbox. People for Animals Google groups usually will not post: 1. Forwards of petitions that are without a background and without a justification or a specific call for action. 2. Discussions which are of a private nature (such as “Thanks, XYZ, I appreciated that advice.”) 3. Emails that do not specifically relate to Indian animal issues, although news items with international implications related to the Indian context may be circulated. 4. Emails that express personal views on issues which are before courts or are being adjudicated before any authority and which may be construed to have detrimental impact on animals.

RAID ON KHUSHHAALPUR | 200 COW & BULL CARCASSES RECOVERED

In another courageous raid by People for Animals Uttarakhand, carcasses of more than 200 cows and bulls were recovered at a godown in Village Khushhaalpur in the Sahaspur Thana area of Dehradun. The team consisting of Gauri Maulekhi, Winston Balman, Pankaj Pokhriyal and Shashank Naithani reached the village with two constables at 6am on 30th March. Near the Kuraishi Mosque of the village, in a godown the carcasses were promptly discovered as per information provided by a local. A mob consisting of village residents surrounded the team in disapproval and frustration but with the timely intervention of the Director General of Police, the Sahaspur police station staff rose to the occassion and a squad was sent to hold fort at the scene of crime. With the assistance of the police, parts more carcasses were recovered from the village orchards and near the stream that flows behind the river. The Kamela area in the village which is an open ground where carcasses are bled, was also teeming with gastro-intestinal matter that was rejected after slaughter of large animals. The Chief Veterinary Officer Dehradun, Dr Avinash Anand sent a team of vets to take samples of the carcasses and prepare a report of the conditions at Maulekhi’s request. Two persons who were seconds from slaughtering another bull in the mango orchard had to abandon their plans and flee while PFA rescued the animal and has taken it under their supervision. Khushhaalpur has become synonymous with cow slaughter ever since PFA first exposed its activities in november 2011. Numerous visits have been paid and raids conducted but till date, animals are being slaughtered in the open maidans and the orchards of this village. Sanitation and hygiene are non existent and the carcasses are dressed by persons who are suffering from TB. This has been established through an RTI that 668 persons from the butcher villages of Khushhaalpur and Mehuwala suffer from this highly contagious disease. TB also spreads through cattle which frequently suffer from it. Since animals slaughtered in the primitive manner as in these cases do not undergo a medical examination, it is impossible to tell if the resulting meat is free from infection or not. Khushhaalpur and Mehuwala are fertile grounds for Tuberculosis infection exchange and generous spread of the disease across the entire district. PFA has also urged the Forest and Rural Development Commissioner through a letter today that animals in these two villages must be tagged and then tested for tuberculosis so that their meat and milk may be avoided and that they may be medicated for the disease. Such a test can easily be done at a laboratory owned by the Department of Animal Husbandry in Pashulok, Rishikesh.

LICENSES ISSUED TO BIRD SELLERS CANCELLED!

The Pioneer – October 10th, 2013. 
Licenses issued to bird sellers cancelled! “Following complaints about various anomalies pertaining to observance of wildlife laws, the state Chief Wildlife Warden and PCCF(Wildlife) SS Sharma ordered cancellation of all licenses issued to bird sellers in the state”

PFA RAISES VOICE AGAINST CATTLE SMUGGLING- PRESENTS MEMORANDUM TO CM

PFA Uttarakhand joins hands with leaders and members of various communities, religious and social, to object to the gross violation of the Uttarakhand Cow and It’s Progeny Protection Act 2007. An estimate 15,000 cattle are smuggled out of the state for illegal slaughter in Uttar Pradesh and the Government of Uttarakhand has been accused of not showing any will to prevent this thriving trade. It has now been established, even by the central government and admitted by terror groups like the HUJI that the proceeds of this illicit smuggling are a major source of terror funding in India. Cow beef that costs Rs 70 in India, when packed and smuggled to the middle east, can be sold for a sum equivalent to rs 700 or to Singapore for 1,500. It brings the estimated profit per cow to Rs 30,000, as each animal weighs in excess of 100 kgs. 
The Uttarakhand Cow and It’s Progeny Protection Act 2007 states that registration of all cattle shall be made compulsory but till date not a single cow or bull has been registered in the entire State. The Act also mentions that it will be the duty of the government to build shelters for stray animals but not one single shelter is run by the Government anywhere in the state. Further, there is no check on the movement of cattle across the borders, although as per law, written permission of the DM is required before any cattle can be transported across the border but this law is almost never observed and the porous state boundary makes it very easy for cattle to be transported due to lack of forest and police vigil. The police are either in connivance with the smugglers or they simply look the other way. Attacks on social workers who try to prevent such crimes are rampant and the police majestically apathetic in these cases too. Recently, People for Animals Uttarakhand along with members of some religious groups led by Swami Vishuddhanand submitted a memorandum to the Chief Minister. The memorandum reveals the bitter truth about the protection of cows in the state. It points out a striking fact that even though the Uttarakhand Cow and It’s Progeny Protection Act was passed in 2007, the corresponding Rules for implementation have not yet been drafted.  It shows that the law has just been an eyewash and was never intended to be used anyway. The government has failed to register any cattle, which has facilitated smuggling and has not allocated any budget towards building shelters for stray animals, which could easily have been done through JNNURM as it is a subject matter of the Urban Development department. As per the 17th national livestock census, the total number of homeless cattle in the State is in exceess of 70,000 but all the NGOs put together have not been able to house more than 3,000 unproductive cattle. The gap has to be filled by the Government as provisioned by the Act. The memorandum was signed and endorsed by leaders of the Hindu groups, especially Shankaracharya Madhavashram and Swami Ramdev, The Christian and the Anglo Indian Community represented by Brother A.J.George, Mrs Violet Gardener, Mr Hilton, the Gurudwara Prabandhan Committees of numerous gurudwaras, the jains, the baniya samaaj, and the muslim community too, represented by Dr Sayyed Farouq. The delegation conveyed that if the demands are not met with, they shall be forced to stage a dharna to peacefully exhibit their dissatisfaction with the hipocricy of the ruling party. PFA Chairperson and MP Maneka Gandhi offered full support to this move and wrote in her letter to the Chief Minister that in the national interest, she will be forced to join the various groups in this constructive effort to get law enforced. PFA Uttarakhand has in the past suggested a group housing plan for managing stray cattle that could also address the methane emission concerns but the same has been turned down by the Uttarakhand Government while a programme on somewhat the same lines has been implemented in Gujrat and is running efficiently.

MISSION TIGER

People for Animals Uttarakhand is actively participating in tiger conservation in the state by trying to find effective solutions for the man-animal conflict and is working in tandem with the Uttarakhand Forest Department to spread awareness about the issues that may help preserve this magnificent animal. 
The campaign spearheaded by the organisation aims at highlighting the possible causes for the increased man-animal conflict and getting the solutions implemented. In this sequence, the Chief Wildlife Conservator has recently signed up with WWF for training the rangers and guards, acting upon PFA’s suggestion. Mr Dev Lahiri, of People for Animals Uttarakhand is also trying to get corporate companies to donate vehicles to the Corbett Tiger Reserve, for better mobility of the staff so that they may be able to discharge their duties effectively. A hindi Feature Film, made exclusively on Tiger Conservation was launched on 17th Feb at Hari Singh Auditorium in FRI. 
The film was showcased by People for Animals Uttarakhand and Mr Biju Lal along with Omkar Naina Productions.  was made by Omkar Naina Productions. Insights from renowned tiger biologists and conservationists and assistance from the Uttarakhand Forest Department makes it the first film of it’s kind anywhere in the world. The Principal Chief Conservator of Forest, Dr R.B.S. Rawat accepted the first CD of the film and declared it open, at the event hosted by PFA Uttarakhand. The film focuses on the various reasons that are responsible for the decline in the tiger population, especially in India. 
More importantly, it provides suggestions for the administration to reverse the decline and how the ordinary citizens can contribute in preserving this grand creation of nature. 
It was greatly appreciated by the members of PFA Uttarakhand, Citizens for Green Doon, Effect, SPCA Dehradun and students of Doon School and Welham Boys’ School. The film could not be possible without the initiative and valuable contribution from Mr Biju Lal, DFO, Nainital who played lead role.

ANIMAL SACRIFICE PREVENTED IN UDHAM SINGH NAGAR

Almora:  Pashubali was due in the Deghat and Agneri temples during Navratri. A public meeting was organized by the Almora SPCA with the funds granted to them at PFA’s  recommendation.  A police personnel happened to give some irresponsible statements at the meeting and the villagers were encouraged to carry on with the practice but we learnt of it. With the help of the FRDC and the IG Kumaon, we got police jeeps with loudspeakers fitted on them to go around in each village with PFA members announcing that anyone found disobeying the High Court Order may suffer imprisonment for 6 months at least. Pashubali was due the following day. 21 out of 28 buffalo bulls were surrendered to the administration. 7 were sacrificed not at the temple but en route. We have asked for the corresponding FIRs under RTI.  Champawat:  PFA lodged an FIR against the temple committee of the Devidhura Temple,and a Court notice was also sent to them in August last year. We groomed a local group to spread awareness and create a sentiment against the practice. Purnagiri, where more than 5,000 goats were slaughtered every year (round the year) abolished pashubali completely this month.  Devidhura, where more than 3000 animals, including buffalo bulls, were slaughtered every year during Rakshabandhan has also passed a resolution to discontinue the practice from this year.  Udham Singh Nagar:  We alerted the Chief Secretary and the FRDC regarding the Chaiti Mela in U.S.Nagar where 2,500 animals were likely to be sacrificed during Navratri. Senior members of the PFA Board personally alerted the DM and he instantly held a series of public meetings. PFA members were part of these meetings and assisted the government in spreading the message effectively. No animal was sacrificed at the Chaiti mela.

CORRIGENDUM

People for Animals Uttarakhand’s relentless campaign to prevent cattle smuggling from the state has now seen through an amendment/corrigendum in the Uttarakhand Gau Samrakshan Adhiniyam passed by the Uttarakhand Government. 
The Act in it’s hindi version states that the fine payable per animal upon being caught taking them across the state border without the necessary permits will be Rs 2,500, whereas in the English version, the same fine has been mentioned as Rs 2.50 per animal. According to the Code of Civil Procedure, if there is a discrepancy in the English and Hindi versions of an Act then the English version is to be taken a correct and valid. This left animal welfare organisations in a very unfortunate position. Days of struggle and dangerous chase is required to catch cattle smugglers who take old, unproductive bulls and cows and calves to Uttar Pradesh or Himachal where they are brutally killed for meat and leather. If the culprits were to be fined with two rupees and fifty paisa per animal, there would be no fear of law. This fault in the Act existed since 2007, till People for Animals took up the matter and saw through the change.

CATTLE SMUGGLERS NABBED

In 6 separate incidents in January and February 2012 the PFA Uttarakhand night patrol nabbed cattle smugglers taking cows and 
buffaloes across the state for slaughter. 
The total number of animals rescued has been 107 and 8 vehicles have been seized including Eicher trucks, Mahindra pickup vans and a dumper truck. The vehicles were nabbed from Rishikesh, Almora, Dehradun, Ramnagar and Udham Singh Nagar. 
Out of the 107, 48 were buffalo bulls and the rest were cows. The animals were stuffed in the vehicles most brutally and more than 20 had died before they could be rescued. A total of 18 people were arrested and charged with Uttarakhand Gau Sanrakshan Adhiniyam 2007,Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1960, Municipal Corporation Act,and the Indian Penal Code. With each rescue we also build pressure on the government to provide shelters for case property animals as directed by the Supreme Court.

PFA RESCUES BULLS FROM SMUGGLERS

On 22.11.11, at noon, following information, the team intercepted 4 smugglers who were taking 10 old bulls to Bijnore, UP via Sahaspur. They were residents of Bijnor and did not have any valid NOC to take the bulls out of the state. They did not possess any ownership proof or a certificate from a veterinarian to certify that the bulls were fit to travel on foot.  One of the 4 men escaped while the PFA team was waiting for police backup. the remaining 3, Ram Gopal, Kali Ram and Vijay were presented before the Magistrate where their bail was denied and they were sent to the Sabhawala jail.  It has been noted on many occasions that most animal trafficking is done through hired men who are nothing but carriers in the larger racket. To nab them demoralises the entire nexus and may help prevent the crimes.

TIGER KILLINGS UTTARAKHAND – THE FACTS

Image Source: OutlookIndia The people of Uttarakhand are outraged at the killing of the big cats in the state recently. The state thrives on the tourism that the National Parks provide but it sadly appears that we are failing, repeatedly, pathetically, to be worthy custodians of the forests and wildlife of this region. Please consider the following facts:  12 Nov 2010 Nandi Devi killed in the Corbett Tiger Reserve at the Sarpdhuli Range.Pugmarks of a tigress identified.  18 Nov 2010 Kalpana Mehra killed in Ramnagar Van Prabhag, Kosi Range.Pugmarks of a tigress identified.  29 Nov 2010 Revti Devi killed in the Corbett Tiger Reserve at the Sarpdhuli Range. Pugmarks of a tigress identified.  11 Jan 2011 Shanti Devi killed in the Corbett Tiger Reserve at the Sarpdhuli Range. Pugmarks of a tigress identified. However, the deadbody of the lady was left uneaten.The very same night, 3 hunters were entrusted with the task of 
shooting the tigeress.They fired 16 rounds and manage to injure a male tiger.3.15 bore guns were used instead of 3.75 and 
above which is legal, in case a tiger HAS TO BE SHOT. No male tiger was involved in any human deaths listed above.  27 Jan 2011 Pooran Chandra was found dead near the National Highway 121.Tiger pugmarks identified and later in the evening, a gloriousmale tiger was shot down by the Forest and Police personnel. It was later identified as the one that was injured in the 11th Jan shoot out, who was forced to attack humans because it was injured.  A trap cage was put up at Rikhnikhal, Tehri Garhwal owing to complaints by villagers. A leopard was trapped in the cage at night on20th January. The forest team reached the spot following day but could not tranquilize and/or release the animal and at 2:30pm, the leopard died of shock.  We strongly suspect that the pregnant tigress found dead in kalagarh range on 25th was stabbed with porcupine quill by the vangujjars who run illegal dairies from inside the forest. A gujjar was attacked by the tigress a day prior but he miraculously escaped. Thetigress and her 5 unborn cubs were not so lucky.The women, in each of the above instances, ventured into the tiger’s habitat, knowingly and willfully, taking a calculated risk which proved costly. The young boy in case 5, disobeyed the instructions of the park authorities and parked his two wheeler in the jungle path at night and was apparently on foot when he was attacked.a) Corbett National Park provides a major share of the tourism sought by the State. The tourists visit the park BECAUSE OF THE TIGER. If we allow ‘an eye for an eye’ policy any longer, it will take only 160 human deaths, for the entire tiger population to be wiped out from Corbett.b) The Lantana growth in the grasslands in the Chaur area is at an all time high. Also the heavy monsoon has caused the Chaur to get flooded. The deer get little to eat there so they venture into the buffer zone close to the National Highway 121 and predictably, the tiger follows. The increased man-animal conflict in the buffer zone is a consequence of the shrunken territory inside the park.c) There is apparently no scientific or even reasonable mechanism to ascertain which tiger actually killed the human. The first tiger that is spotted in the territory is showered with bullets. Footprints of 14 different tigers were found in the territory where the unfortunate incident occurred on 27th January. There is 92.86% chancethat the young and healthy animal that was killed was not the‘man-eater’ at all. No attempt whatsoever was made to capture the animal, to tranquilize it or to observe it’s movement to confirm if it was the indeed a man-eater.
 d) It is a matter of concern that the illegal village settlementat Sunderkhal is becoming more and more densely populated. No effort has been made to rehabilitate these illegal settlers and their cattle. No criminal proceedings have been initiated against these individuals who flout every law of the land, encroach on government property, deliberately jeopardize the lives of their women by sending them to the CTR region to collect firewood, threaten govt officials, pelt stones at the forest rangers, cause an obstruction in the free movement of the wild animals from the CTR to the Kosi River, in the dry season. e) The villagers need to collect firewood and Kari Patta from the jungle for their livelihood. They have the option to go across the Kosi towards the forest of Sita Bani which is safer, but it is certainly convenient to simply enter the Corbett Tiger Reserve which is closer and firewood is found more easily. This convenience comes at a cost. f) Encouraged by the fact that no case has ever been booked against them, they defiantly enter the tiger’s habitat on foot and in the event of a mishap, they harass the forest staff, including the Director of the park. g) It is noteworthy, that little or no police protection is available to the forest officers, who are grossly understaffed and understandably incapable of resisting an angry mob of hundreds violent men and women. h) The equipment and even the modes of transport available to these rangers and guards is insufficient, to say the least. 
Consequently, they are unable to discharge their duties, however willing they may be. The training facilities especially in the use of tranquilizer guns is a rarity in our state, even though usage of cages and traps is rampant to cater to the insecurities of the residents. i) The tiger that was killed on 27th Jan was mounted on an elephant and a jubilant procession of people tugged at it’s tail and whiskers as they marched along the NH121. This sorry sight was offensive for many and could have been prevented by the Forest Department. It reflects an attitude and mindset of the local settlers which is not healthy for the critical area that they occupy. We demand effective implementation of the Wildlife Protection Act 1972 throughout the State though a dedicated forest department. 
Vacancies need to be filled up and state of the art equipment must be purchased to protect the extremely vulnerable and precious wildlife of the State. Formal training programmes must be conducted for the rangers and guards and they must be updated on the latest research findings. 
Absolutely no animal must be shot at because there is ‘pressure from the people’. If no attempt is made to capture the animal and it is killed in cold blood, it is punishable under the Wildlife ProtectionAct 1972. Sophisticated methods of research may be adopted so that the changingnature of the ecology of Corbett and other areas rich in wildlife may be studied and remedies sought. The fact that the grasslands are flooded and lantana infestation has destroyed the habitat of the deer and they are flocking towards the buffer zone, should have beenforeseen. The wealth of flora and fauna in Uttarakhand is immensely precious and we cannot jeopardize it’s existence by maintaining such low standards.The department that is the custodian of the forests and wildlife needsto be well equipped and trained to handle emergencies as well as to discharge their day to day duties. By cutting down on the cost to provide for a well equipped forest team, we may one day turn Uttarakhand into a state of barren hills and poorer people. PFA Ramnagar members are motivating the villagers to stop demonizing the animal on which the entire economy and the ecology of the region depends. 
PFA Uttarakhand has alerted the Animal Welfare Board of India and National Tiger Conservation Authority member Mrs Maneka Gandhi along with the CM and Sri Jairam Ramesh expressing deep concern over facts that have come to light after thorough investigation done by our team.

MALPRACTICES AT MALSI DEER PARK EXPOSED

A team of PFA Uttarakhand visited the Malsi Deer Park in Dehradun and 
exposed the following malpractices: 1) The Park is grossly understaffed. The visitors could be seen 
trying to provoke the animals, feeding them through the gaps in the 
cages, shouting screaming and even trying to poke at them with sticks. a) All cages (except the ones housing the leopards) were found 
without stand off barriers (compulsory as per law)to prevent the 
visitors from getting too near to the enclosures. As a result in some 
cages the mesh had been pulled out from corners in an attempt to feed 
or physically touch the animal, subjecting them to injury and stress. b) Not enough signboards were found where people could be 
instructed to refrain from disturbing/annoying/provoking the animals. c) No biologist/education officer was on duty to prevent such 
occurrences, as has been provisioned by the Recognition of Zoo Rules 
2009. 2) A peacock and a wild cock were kept in a single enclosure. 
Whereas another peacock was kept in another solitary confinement for 
over 3 years. As per law an animal cannot be kept without a mate for a 
period of over 1 year. Similarly, the male and the female leopard at 
the Park are not compatible, we were informed, and have thus been kept 
separately without mates for a similar length of time despite the fact 
that they are young and capable of breeding. 3) Two rescued owls, of unknown/rare species, were found caged 
in small parrot cages (similar to the ones used in households) 
measuring not more than 20 inches in height each giving them no space 
for free movement, exercise or expression of natural behavior. These 
wild birds cannot even flap their wings in these confinements and are 
subjected to massive cruelty while on display, a gross violation in 
every respect. The law prescribes that an enclosure for birds of prey 
has to be not less than 300 sq meters in area. 4) As per the Recognition of Zoo Rules 2009, sick, injured or 
infirm animals are not to be displayed but a black eagle and an owl of 
unknown species, both visibly injured were kept on display at the 
Park. We have on many previous occasions pointed out this lapse 
regarding injured/infirm animals on display but the situation keeps 
repeating itself due to the negligence of the authorities. 5) The Park has no crisis management plan nor are any mock 
drills conducted to cope in the event of a natural disaster, animal 
escapes, disease outbreaks, strike by staff etc. As per the guidelines 
provided by the Central Zoo Authority such a strategy has to be made, 
practiced and reviewed regularly. 6) A star turtle has been housed in an enclosure measuring not 
more than 30 square meters with only a little patch of water, a few 
inches deep. The prescribed area should not be less than 300 square 
meters with half the area covered with water with a depth of 2 meters. 7) Most importantly, the Park has not bothered to engage a full 
time veterinarian even though it keeps a total of 156 animals. A vet 
who visits the park once a week is not trained in handling or treating 
wildlife. The male leopard has now had an injury over 2 years old that 
refuses to heal completely. Investigation and a possible surgical 
intervention that may be needed for this precious feline cannot 
possibly be done in these circumstances. The birds with broken wings that may need wiring or other corrective 
surgeries have to be content with mere first aid if they survive a 
week long wait. We suggested that the following improvements be done immediately: 1) Hiring of a full time veterinarian trained in handling wildlife. 2) Hiring a full time Curator, with power to make decisions, to 
manage upkeep and maintenance of the Park, as provisioned by law. 3) Hiring a full time Education officer with staff to make sure 
that the purpose of displaying animals to public is not defeated or 
wasted. 4) Expansion of enclosures to match the minimum requirement 
provisioned by law. 5) Maintaining enough staff to manage clean food and water 
supply for animals which was currently found lacking. 6) Having a crisis management plan and mock drills at least once 
every month. 7) Infirm or injured animals be taken off display. 8 ) Stand Off barriers be constructed along each enclosure to 
keep people from getting too close to the animals. 9) Rose ringed parakeets and peacocks may be released into the 
wild as they are common birds and need not be displayed in a zoo. 
Instead, these enclosures can be used to house birds that are 
currently crammed into tiny cages. 10) All animals that have been kept in solitary confinements must be 
put up for adoption in other zoos or released into the wild, as may be 
considered fit.

SANJIVANI EXPRESS LAUNCHED

While having our morning brew, few ever wonder what happened to the calf whose rightful share of milk has been spared for us. The very same calves, bred so that we may have our delightful dairy delicacies, are the ones that are roam the streets of our city and cause a traffic ‘menace’. People For Animals (Uttarakhand) launched Sanjeevani Express, its mobile feeding service for homeless cattle in Dehradun on January 9. Animal lover and senior member of the Citizens For Green Doon (CFGD) group Rita Singh inaugurated this mobile feeding service along with Mr Pushkar Singh Dhami, Chairman of the Urban Development Board, at the GPO on Sunday. Sri Dhami also accepted to be a member of People  for Animals and offered to help in all it’s future projects. From here the Sanjeevani Express travelled to different localities of the town to feed  over 100 homeless cattle. The launch of this service also marked the start of cooperation between the PFA and Citizens for Green Doon in efforts undertaken to facilitate a green and healthy environment in Dehradun. The PFA Uttarakhand Member Secretary Gauri Maulekhi said that the Sanjeevani Express mobile feeding service will provide fodder to stray cattle in different localities of the town on a periodic basis. The credit for conceptualizing and implementing this activity goes to the young and enthusiastic volunteers of the core field team of PFA, Ankit Jain and Ankit Chadha. PFA plans to operate 
the mobile service on a weekly basis at present but depending on donations, the homeless cattle can also be fed on a daily basis in the future. The CFGD is a group of aware citizens concerned about the environment who have worked for raising public awareness and eliciting government action on 
issues like illegal and unnecessary felling of green trees in the city. As the PFA also believes in facilitating a green and healthy environment for both humans and animals, it was thought that by cooperating with each other, the  consolidated efforts of both these bodies will prove more beneficial for the public, environment and animals. Fodder for each trip of the Sanjeevani Express costs around Rs1,500 and PFA is confident that they will be able to find 365 concerned citizens from Dehradun who will help make it a daily service. For those who may be interested in commemorating their special days by funding a day’s meal, are also offered guided tours to witness the joy of giving. “The contribution,” adds Maulekhi “is not a philanthropic act but a moral responsibility of each one who consumes milk products. Sanjeevani Express attempts to reach out to abandoned and starved cattle which are a result of our insatiable appetite for milk products.”
